Title: Driving Epidemic Models with AI Agents: the Epydemix Agent Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.28692v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 00:10:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# Driving Epidemic Models with AI Agents: the Epydemix Agent Framework 

## Nicol` o Gozzi 1,2, Ciro Cattuto 1* , Alessandro Vespignani 2,11 ISI Foundation, Turin, Italy 

2 Network Science Institute, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 

*Corresponding author: Ciro Cattuto, ciro.cattuto@isi.it 

Abstract 

Artificial Intelligence agents based on large language models provide convenient natural language interfaces to scientific software, but reliability is not automatic. Here we introduce the Epydemix Agent Framework, an additive layer over Epydemix, an open-source Python library for stochas-tic compartmental epidemic modeling. The framework extends the library with four capabilities to facilitate interaction with an AI agent: discovery of available models and parameters, preven-tive validation of a declarative scenario specification, execution through tested library code, and inspectability of results. These capabilities let an agent handle the entire modeling process, from the natural-language description of the scenario to quantitative results, figures, and interpretation of findings without writing custom code. Each step reads input files and saves results in a sepa-rate output bundle, making the process auditable and reproducible. First, we show the end-to-end workflow with a case study comparing vaccination strategies for a novel respiratory virus. Second, we assessed the framework across 50 agent sessions and five modeling tasks by comparing the agent use of the framework against the direct use of the Python interface. The framework reduced turns, output tokens, and cost on most tasks, unless it trades resources for per-point reproducibility. 

# 1 Introduction 

Dynamic transmission models are widely used to simulate disease spread and to evaluate public health interventions [1–4]. Realistic models simulate stochastic dynamics in age-structured populations, with contact matrices, and include interventions as changes in dynamics over time. Several infectious disease modeling tools exist as software libraries that expose programming interfaces, but their use requires programming expertise. Graphical user interfaces remove this requirement but constrain what a user can specify and simulate. The rise of artificial Intelligence (AI) agents based on large language models 1arXiv:2609.28692v1 [cs.AI] 23 Sep 2026 (LLMs) offers a third mode of interaction, in which a researcher describes a task in natural language and an agent operates the software [5, 6]. Current AI agents can translate natural-language task descriptions into sequences of operations performed via software tools [7]. As a result, they are now increasingly used to write code, perform analyses, and coordinate workflows. In epidemic modeling, AI agents allow a researcher to specify a scenario, configure a model, compare interventions, and interpret results without writing code for each analysis. Agents with such capabilities include Anthropic’s Claude Code [8], OpenAI’s Codex CLI [9], and open-source alternatives [10]. Epydemix [11] is an open-source Python package for the development, simulation, and calibration of stochastic compartmental epidemic models. As with most scientific libraries, this package was not designed for text-mediated interaction. Instead, Epydemix was developed for scripts and computational notebooks, where configurations, model states, and results persist in memory as objects across function calls. An AI agent cannot reliably preserve such objects between tool calls. It has no way to discover library functionalities (e.g., available models and parameters) without reading source code or documen-tation. Similarly, an agent cannot extract summary measures such as attack rates from a binary output without writing custom code. Finally, sources of error may come from the agent itself. Indeed, it may specify parameter values that appear plausible but are invalid or reference functions and parameters that are not supported. These failure modes can have serious consequences in epidemic modeling, where outputs are used to compare interventions and mitigation strategies and can ultimately inform actions. More generally, the reliable use of a modeling library from an AI agent requires four capabilities that a Python application programming interface (API) does not provide by default. The first one is 

discoverability : programmatic access to available models and parameters, without requiring the agent to read source code or documentation. The second is declarative specification : a self-contained description of a scenario that can be validated before execution. The third is reliable and reproducible execution :running validated scenario configurations through calls to tested library code rather than through custom code the agent writes for the task. The last capability is inspectability : compact textual summaries of simulation outputs, allowing the agent to obtain the quantities it needs without parsing raw outputs. These capabilities also support researchers’ work. For instance, a declarative configuration can be in-spected, edited, versioned, and shared. This also addresses a documented challenge of the field. A recent audit could reproduce only a small fraction of sampled COVID-era modeling studies [12, 13], and several omissions were identified in reproducibility checklists [14]. In this paper, we introduce the Epydemix Agent Framework. The framework implements the four capabilities described above as an additive layer on top of the existing Epydemix Python API. This approach leaves the library and all existing notebooks and scripts unchanged. Its interface is stateless and file-based, so that each operation is a pure function of its input files. We demonstrate the end-to-end workflow with a case study comparing four intervention strategies for a novel respiratory virus, and we 2assess the framework across more than 50 agent sessions. 

# 2 Materials and methods 

We use the term AI agent to refer to a system built around an LLM that operates external software through tool calling. A task is described to the agent through a natural language prompt [15]. It then proceeds iteratively, selecting an operation, reading the returned result, and determining the next step until the task is complete [16]. The key property is that agents interact with software libraries entirely through text. The available functions, their arguments, and outputs must all be expressed as text and fit within the agents’ context window. 

## 2.1 The Epydemix library 

Epydemix is an open-source Python package that supports the development and calibration of dynamic transmission models with any compartmental structure and dynamic public health interventions [11]. To allow simulations with realistic demographic and mixing patterns, a companion repository including age-stratified distributions and social contact matrices is available [17]. The package adopts a discrete-chain binomial process simulation engine and supports the full modeling pipeline, from model specification and simulation to parameter inference, forecasting, and scenario projection. The epidemic model is built as an object, with compartments and transitions added through method calls, and results returned as in-memory objects. 

## 2.2 The Epydemix Agent Framework 

After being prompted with a natural-language scenario description, the agent framework proceeds through a four-phase workflow (Fig. 1). During the Discover phase, the agent identifies the available models and retrieves default parameter values drawn from the literature for the disease of interest. Dur-ing Declare , the scenario is encoded in a configuration file (in YAML format) and validated against the parameter registry. Nothing is computed until validation passes. During Run , the framework executes the simulation, calibration, or projection and writes the results to a self-contained output bundle. During 

Inspect , the agent queries the output bundle for compact structured summaries and compares outcomes across scenarios. The current implementation uses the YAML format, but the design is not tied to any particular structured text format. Six components implement this workflow on top of the existing Epydemix Python API (Fig. 2). Three are on-disk artifacts the framework reads, writes, and inspects: the parameter registry, the declarative configuration files, and the output bundles. Two are the elements that operate on those artifacts, namely the command-line interface (CLI) and the inspection engine. The sixth, the agent contract, documents 31 2 3 4Discover 

> What models and parameters exist?

Declare 

> Write a con fi g, validate before spending compute

Run 

> Simulate, calibrate, project. Bundled outputs on disk

Inspect     

> Compact JSON answers. Compare scenarios Natural language scenario Quantitative results + fi gures
> →.epx bundle
> Discovery & planning Compute & analysis

Figure 1: Canonical four-phase workflow of the Epydemix Agent Framework. Starting from a natural-language scenario description, an AI agent progresses through four sequential phases: (1) 

Discover : enumerate available models and retrieve literature-sourced parameter defaults; (2) Declare :encode the scenario as a YAML configuration file and validate it against the parameter registry before any computation; (3) Run : execute simulation, calibration, or projection, writing results to a self-contained 

.epx output bundle; (4) Inspect : query the bundle for compact, structured summaries and compare outcomes across scenarios. The framework is stateless: each phase operates exclusively on files, with no Python objects persisting across calls. the framework in a form the agent can read and understand its use. 

Parameter registry. Each model built from one of the predefined base models (SIR, SEIR, SIS and SEIAR), together with any optional module layered on it (waning immunity, vaccination, clinical outcomes), carries a machine-readable registry of its parameters. For every parameter the registry records its name and a natural-language description of its role in the dynamics, its kind (rate, probability, count, duration, proportion or dimensionless), data type and expected shape (scalar, time-varying, age-structured), its units, admissible range and default value, whether it is required, and other parameters it depends on. An agent can therefore discover what a model accepts without reading its source code. 

Declarative configuration. A scenario configuration is a single, short YAML file that documents the model, the population (i.e., age distribution and contact matrices), the simulation time window, and the parameter values. The same file is the input to every downstream component. Configurations inherit through overlays, meaning that a scenario can import a base configuration and override only the selected fields. A comparison of four intervention strategies therefore translates into four short overlays on one single base file, which keeps the differences between them explicit. Configuration files can be automatically validated for correctness, so that, e.g., out-of-range values and inconsistent settings are detected before spending compute time. 

Configuration-driven CLI. The agent controls the workflow via a command-line interface (CLI) tool ( epydemix ). The CLI exposes each step of the workflow through dedicated sub-commands: models ,4schema , defaults , validate , run , calibrate , project , inspect , and compare . Each subcommand reads its inputs from files and writes standardized output into structured JSON. No state is carried between calls, so that every invocation is a pure function of its input files, and an agent or an automated pipeline can drive the workflow without a persistent Python session. We adopted statelessness because an agent cannot reliably hold Python objects across tool calls, while also letting a human script the same commands. 

Output bundles. Every run , calibrate , and project operation returns its output in a standard-ized bundle enclosed within an .epx directory. The bundle contains simulation trajectories as Parquet files, posterior parameter samples for calibration runs, generated figures, and a manifest.json file recording the simulation metadata and source configuration. Each bundle also records its parent config-uration and any upstream bundles it derives from. The provenance of a derived result can therefore be reconstructed from the filesystem alone, without the need for an external log. 

Inspection engine. The inspection engine supplies the summarization logic behind the inspect 

and compare sub-commands. It converts the bundle’s Parquet contents into compact JSON rather than returning raw arrays, reporting summary statistics of trajectories such as quantiles, peak timing and magnitude, attack rates, and pairwise differences between bundles. The agent thus obtains the quantities needed for the analysis of the simulations within its context window. 

Agent contract. The document an agent reads first is the contract AGENT.md . The file describes the four-phase workflow, the configuration format with annotations for each field, the command-line interface with its CLI subcommands, and the exact structure of the JSON output. The contract also contains a set of worked-out examples. The first version of the contract was produced by having an agent inspecting the Epydemix source code, documentation, and the CLI built on top of it. The contract has then been refined iteratively by running the framework on an informal set of tasks, including the examples distributed with the library, and then using a second agent to review the execution logs and identify sources of friction. The revisions include a catalog of failure modes observed during development together with their corrections, and a translation guide mapping natural-language disease descriptions onto Epydemix compartments and transitions. The guide addresses the hardest step of the Declare 

phase, where the model structure must be fixed before assigning any parameter values. The declarative configuration format covers common compartmental modeling workflows but not the whole Epydemix API functionality. For example, a YAML configuration cannot express custom transition functions, non-standard age-group structures, or post hoc result transformations. Since the framework leaves the Epydemix API untouched, such functionalities remain available through direct API interaction, though they do not inherit the validation, provenance, and reproducibility of the structured interface. Indeed, the contract instructs the agent to use the CLI by default and to fall back on direct API calls only when an operation cannot be expressed declaratively. 5Parameter registry 

> machine-readable metadata, valid ranges, and units; literature-sourced defaults; JSON Schema export

Declarative configuration  

> single ∼20-line YAML scenario; model, population, parameters; inheritance with overlays

Output bundles 

> self-contained Parquet trajectories, posterior samples, manifest, and figures; records its parent

Command-line interface (CLI)       

> One command surface for agent and human. Subcommands models ,schema ,defaults ,validate ,run ,
> calibrate ,project . Each reads its inputs from files and returns structured JSON on standard output; every call is a pure function of its input files.

Inspection engine     

> behind the inspect and compare
> subcommands: quantiles, peaks, attack rates, deltas

Agent contract (AGENT.md)       

> workflow ·annotated configuration format ·CLI command & output shapes ·worked examples

Figure 2: The components of the Epydemix Agent Framework. The agent contract ( AGENT.md ,top) is the document an agent reads first. The command-line interface (middle) is the single control surface for both an AI agent and a human researcher, and the inspection engine is part of it. The three data components (bottom) are the filesystem-backed artifacts that the framework reads and writes. The agent contract and tooling create a layer over the existing Epydemix Python API without modifying it. The Epydemix agent framework is open source and available at https://github .com/epistorm/ epydemix on the agent-framework branch, under the same GPL-3.0 license as the core library. 

## 2.3 Experimental setup 

Software and installation. All agent sessions used Claude Code from the terminal (version v2.1.198) with Claude Sonnet 5 as the underlying model, running under a Claude Pro subscription. We used version 1.3.1 of Epydemix and version 1 of the agent framework (commit hash 55d4e33). Sessions were run on July 1 st , 2026. The framework and its dependencies can be installed from a terminal via 

git clone --branch agent-framework https://github.com/epistorm/epydemix.git cd epydemix pip install -e ".[agent]" 

We recommend the installation inside a dedicated virtual environment, for example via venv or 

conda . This installs the epydemix command-line interface together with the agent contract. If the 

epydemix executable is not discoverable on PATH after installation, the CLI can equivalently be invoked as python3 -m epydemix.cli.main from the repository root. The framework requires that the agent can read local files and issue shell commands, and that it is invoked from the repository root so that 

AGENT.md is discoverable. A complete walkthrough for reproducing the case study, including installation, 6agent setup, and troubleshooting, is provided in the Supplementary Information (SI Guide S4). 

Comparison conditions. We run experiments considering two different conditions. In the frame-work condition, the agent has access to the Epydemix CLI and to the agent contract, and is directed to follow the four-phase workflow described above. In the direct API condition, the agent receives the same repository with all references to the CLI and the agent contract removed, and works through the Epydemix Python API directly with the library documentation and examples available. The direct API condition is therefore not in complete absence of tooling, but mimics the setup faced by a researcher using a well-documented library with a coding agent, without any additional layer mediating the interaction. 

Multi-task evaluation. Our main assessment covers five epidemiological modeling tasks: an SEIRHD scenario comparison, an SIR calibration, a concatenated calibrate-then-project workflow, a school-closure sweep, and a measles coverage sweep. Each task was repeated five times in each of the two conditions, giving 50 agent sessions in total. All sessions started from identical initial conditions, and a session could not access artifacts produced by another one. For each session, we extracted performance metrics from the agent’s runtime system, namely wall-clock time, time spent in model requests, number of turns, number of output tokens, and cost. Task definitions and per-session values are given in the Supplementary Information (SI Additional Tasks S5). 

Case study comparison. We additionally ran the vaccination case study of Section 3.1 four times in each condition, giving eight further sessions. Each of these was split into two phases to separate agent exploration from execution. In the first phase, the agent operated in plan mode, reading the available context as well as the user’s prompt and producing an inspectable plan. This phase was read-only, since tools that could modify state were unavailable. In this phase, no configuration files were written, and no simulations were run. In the second phase, the agent operated in execute mode and carried out the plan step by step. The split allows the cost and runtime of exploratory reading and reasoning to be attributed separately from those of the analysis itself. 

Metrics and statistics. For each task and metric of the multi-task evaluation, we report the ratio of the median in the framework condition to the median in the direct API condition, so that values below one indicate lower resource use with the framework. Distribution-free confidence intervals for the ratio are obtained using the Wilcoxon rank-sum statistic. With five observations per condition, the attainable exact coverage is 96 .8%, which is the level we report throughout. Intervals are computed per task and metric, without correction for multiple comparisons. For the case study comparison, we report the coefficient of variation across the four runs of each condition. We report in separate the planning and execution phases results. Costs are reported in US dollars as billed by the model provider at the time of the sessions. The cost should not be interpreted as a stable estimate and is given just to compare between conditions. 73 Results 

## 3.1 Case study: vaccination scenarios 

To illustrate the end-to-end workflow, we tasked an AI agent to compare vaccination strategies for a simulated epidemic. The study considered a novel respiratory virus spreading in Italy in a fully susceptible population. The disease assumptions include a basic reproduction number R0 ≈ 2.5, a mean latent period of 3 days, and a mean infectious period of 5 days. We also assumed that, on average, 0 .8% of infections led to hospitalization, with a mean hospital stay of 10 days, and that an available vaccine reduced susceptibility to infection by 85%. The simulations covered 16 months and used 55 , 000 beds as the national hospital-capacity threshold. The agent was instructed to include a no-vaccination baseline. Instructions on vaccination rates and the timing and magnitude of the non-pharmaceutical intervention in the combined strategy were left qualitative. This lack of detail is meant to test whether the agent can translate informal descriptions into internally consistent parameter values. The agent’s input consists of the contract and the verbatim prompt below: 

Prompt given verbatim to the agent 

Read AGENT.md first, then carry out the following study end-to-end using the epydemix CLI. Work through the discover → declare → run → inspect workflow, use a shared base configuration with overlays for the scenarios, and validate every config before running it. 

Scenario. A novel respiratory virus is spreading in Italy in a fully susceptible population. Epidemiological assumptions: basic reproduction number R 0 ≈ 2.5, mean latent period ≈ 3 days, mean infectious period ≈ 5days. About 0.8% of infected individuals are hospitalized, with a mean hospital stay of ≈ 10 days. A vaccine is available that reduces transmission by ≈ 85%. Italy can dedicate ≈ 55,000 hospital beds to this epidemic; sustained occupancy above that line means the health system is overwhelmed. Use a real Italian population with age-structured contact matrices (home, work, school, community) and simulate a 16-month horizon. 

Important: derive the transmission rate from the target R 0 using the population’s contact structure — do not use a preset transmission rate directly, since the contact matrix rescales it. Model hospitalization as a disease outcome and include a vaccination compartment. Compare four strategies: 

1. No vaccination — the uncontrolled baseline. 

2. Slow rollout — a low constant per-capita vaccination rate. 

3. Rapid rollout — a high constant per-capita vaccination rate. 

4. Combined — a moderate vaccination rate plus temporary non-pharmaceutical interventions (reduced school and workplace contacts for a few months during the wave). For each strategy report: peak hospital occupancy, the peak date, the number of days occupancy exceeds the 

855,000-bed capacity, and the total attack rate with deltas against the no-vaccination baseline. Then produce a single comparison figure showing hospital occupancy over time for all four strategies with the capacity line marked, and write a short interpretation: which strategies keep the system under capacity, and what the comparison implies for rollout speed versus combining measures. 

We ran four instances of this study in the framework condition (Section 2.3). The agent made the same key modeling choices in all four instances. It selected an SEIR model with vaccination and hospitalization compartments and used the CLI’s schema command to confirm that the model contained the compartments required by the scenarios. The transmission rate corresponding to the target R0 was derived considering the spectral radius of Italy’s combined contact matrix ( ρ ≈ 13 .90) instead of using a preset value. In every instance, the agent determined that the built-in attack-rate metric does not apply to a leaky-vaccine model and computed the attack rate instead from the sum of the susceptible-to-exposed and vaccinated-to-exposed transition flows, following the guidance in the contract. For the 

Combined scenario, it ran the baseline first to locate the epidemic peak, then placed the temporary contact-reduction window around it. As expected, the four runs diverged on quantities and choices the prompt left unspecified. For instance, each time the agent assigned different values for the per-capita vaccination rates, though their ordering across strategies was always preserved ( Slow rollout < Combined 

< Rapid rollout ). The agent also used different numbers of stochastic realizations, simulation start date, and duration/magnitude of contact reduction in the Combined scenario. Figure 3 shows the hospital-occupancy trajectories, and the box below reproduces the agent’s final report verbatim for one of the instances. The Supplementary Information (SI Plan S1) includes the agent’s plan, along with the layout, schema, and column-naming conventions of the underlying output bundle (SI Bundle S2). In this run, the no-vaccination baseline exceeded hospital capacity for 33 days and peaked at roughly 95,000 occupied beds. Slow rollout lowered the peak by about 13,500 beds but still breached capacity for 29 days. Rapid rollout held peak occupancy below 3,500 beds and the attack rate below 6%. The Combined strategy, at half the vaccination rate of Rapid rollout , also stayed below capacity, but its attack rate was 26 .3%. That higher attack rate reflects transmission resuming after lifting the contact-reduction intervention, while vaccination continued at the lower rate. 

Agent output                 

> Study complete Setup: SEIR + vaccination +outcome: hospitalization modules on Italy’s real age-structured pop-ulation (59.4M, 4 contact layers). transmission rate = 0.0359742 derived from R0= 2 .5 via the contact matrix’s spectral radius ( ρ≈13 .899) rather than guessed. Shared base.yaml + one overlay per scenario, all validated before running. Bundles and configs live in italy study/ (repo root).

9Results (deltas vs. no-vaccination baseline, Hospitalized total, 55,000-bed capacity) 

Metric No vaccination Slow rollout Rapid rollout Combined (baseline) (0.001/day) (0.01/day) (0.005/day + NPIs) Peak occupancy 94,781 81,309 3,183 15,299 (−13,472) (−91,598) (−79,482) Peak date 2024-04-10 2024-04-14 2024-05-08 2024-04-26 (+4d) (+28d) (+16d) Days over capacity 33 29 ( −4) 0 ( −33) 0 ( −33) Attack rate 80.4% 72.7% ( −7.7 pp) 5.6% ( −74.7 pp) 26.3% ( −54.1 pp) Combined scenario: rate 0.005/day + 70% school / 30% work contact reduction, 2024-03-20 to 2024-05-15. 

Figure 

italy study/no vax.epx/figures/hospital capacity comparison.png (also registered in that bundle’s manifest). 

Interpretation 

Only rapid rollout and the combined strategy keep the system under the 55,000-bed line — slow rollout still overwhelms capacity for 29 days, barely better than doing nothing. Rollout speed dominates: rapid vaccination alone (0.01/day, no NPIs) beats the combined strategy on every metric despite the combined scenario using a lower vaccination rate plus temporary contact reductions — vaccinating fast enough to blunt the wave before it peaks is worth more than a moderate rate plus a few months of partial school/work closures. The practical takeaway: if achievable, invest in rollout speed first; temporary NPIs are a useful hedge when rapid rollout capacity doesn’t exist (moderate rate + NPIs still avoids capacity breach and cuts attack rate by more than half), but they are a substitute for speed, not a superior complement to it, given the specific rates and reduction assumptions used here. 

It is worth stressing that the figures in the agent’s report carry more digits than the assumptions support. For instance, the derived transmission rate is reported to seven significant figures. For the sake of reproducing the agent results, we decided to report the verbatim output. 

## 3.2 Framework and direct API use compared 

3.2.1 The vaccination case study 

We first compare the two agent conditions, framework and direct API use, in the vaccination case study where the two-phase design separates exploration from execution, as presented in Section 3.1. The two conditions reached similar qualitative epidemiological conclusions. In both conditions, the agent identified rollout speed as the main factor associated with outcomes, and used the same strategies to 10 Figure 3: Hospital occupancy over the 16-month simulation horizon under the four vaccination strategies, for the representative framework run reported in Section 3.1, with the 55,000-bed capacity threshold marked (dashed red line). Solid lines show the median across 100 stochastic simulations; shaded bands show the 90% interval. keep hospital occupancy below capacity. A detailed comparison of results and agent choices is given in the Supplementary Information (SI Comparison S3). The mean total cost was $2.98 in the framework condition and $4.89 in the direct API condition, a 64% increase. Mean total runtime was 582 s with the framework and 835 s without, an increase of 43% (Fig. 4). These totals are split between planning and execution. In the framework condition, the mean cost was divided 48% to planning and 52% to execution, on average. In the direct API condition, the shares were 56% for planning and 44% for execution. Runtime separated the conditions more sharply, with planning taking 41% of total time under the framework and 60% without it. The plan-mode transcripts show why. Agents in the direct API condition spent much of the planning phase reading the Epydemix source code for information that the AGENT.md contract provides to the framework condition. The framework condition also shows lower Run-to-run variation(Table 1). For cost, the coefficient of variation was 0 .10 during planning and 0 .15 during execution, against 0 .19 and 0 .35 in the direct API condition. For runtime, the corresponding values were 0 .15 and 0 .17 against 0 .30 and 0 .40. Metric (CV = std/mean) Phase Framework Direct API Total cost Planning 0.10 0.19 

Execution 0.15 0.35 

Total duration Planning 0.15 0.30 

Execution 0.17 0.40 

Table 1: Coefficient of variation across the four case-study runs of each condition, for cost (USD) and running time (seconds), broken down by planning-phase and execution-phase values. Lower values indicate greater run-to-run consistency. The higher, less consistent value in each row is shown in bold. 11 Figure 4: Compute-budget distribution across the eight case-study runs. Top (A): total cost per run in USD, stacked by phase (solid: planning; hatched: execution), colored by condition (green: framework, run1–run4; orange: direct API, run5–run8). Bottom (B): wall-clock running time per run in seconds, stacked in the same way. The rightmost bar in each condition group shows the across-run average, with error bars giving ±1 standard deviation for each phase and the percentage of the total contributed by planning and execution annotated alongside. 

3.2.2 Additional modeling tasks 

To provide a more thorough analysis, we ran the comparison between agent conditions across five addi-tional modeling tasks, with five runs per task in each condition. Across tasks, the framework generally reduced the computing resources the agent used (Table 2). The Calibrate → Project task shows the largest difference, with the framework condition completing the task in 0 .53 × the wall-clock time, 0 .45 ×

the output tokens, and 0 .52 × the cost, with the confidence interval excluding parity on every metric. SIR calibration and Measles coverage sweep tasks show the same pattern. This suggests that a structured interface and an explicit contract remove much of the exploratory work. The agent spends fewer turns discovering how to set up and run a model and generates less text. The comparison between the two operating conditions of the agent is, however, strongly task-dependent. Interestingly, the School-closure sweep task reverses the pattern. For this task, the framework condition requires 1 .41 × the API time, 1 .32 × the output tokens, and 1 .81 × the cost relative to the di-rect API condition. The origin of this reversal can be traced back to the artifacts the agent produced. The task sweeps over 18 intervention start dates. The framework condition considers each sweep as an 12 Task Wall clock time (s) Time in API (s) # Turns # Output tokens Cost ( $)SEIRHD scenarios 1.05 

> [0.85, 4.78]

0.98 

> [0.73, 5.14]

0.77 

> [0.60, 0.96]

0.79 

> [0.68, 0.91]

0.91 

> [0.81, 1.04]

SIR calibration 0.73 

> [0.59, 0.95]

0.57 

> [0.53, 0.70]

0.62 

> [0.55, 0.72]

0.58 

> [0.49, 0.67]

0.71 

> [0.65, 0.95]

Calibrate → Project 0.53 

> [0.45, 0.57]

0.50 

> [0.43, 0.55]

0.63 

> [0.53, 0.70]

0.45 

> [0.37, 0.45]

0.52 

> [0.49, 0.73]

School-closure sweep 2.04 

> [1.24, 3.27]

1.41 

> [1.25, 2.24]

1.38 

> [1.00, 2.21]

1.32 

> [1.18, 2.23]

1.81 

> [1.34, 3.34]

Measles coverage sweep 0.81 

> [0.42, 1.12]

0.83 

> [0.62, 0.93]

0.80 

> [0.68, 0.89]

0.71 

> [0.62, 0.93]

0.88 

> [0.67, 1.05]

Table 2: Framework performance relative to direct use of the Epydemix Python API, by task. Each cell reports the ratio of medians (framework / direct API) over 5 runs per condition, together with an exact 96 .8% distribution-free confidence interval for the ratio (Wilcoxon rank-sum). Values below 1 indicate lower resource use in the framework condition. Values in bold indicate ratios whose confidence interval excludes 1. independent run with its own configuration file and a self-describing bundle. In the direct API condition, the same 18 sweeps run as a single Python loop that writes multiple output files. This implies that the higher use of resources in the framework condition is not an efficiency loss. On the contrary, resources are spent to have every step of the sweep recorded as an independent and auditable artifact, storing the configuration that produced it, its outputs, a provenance record, and the random seed used for its gener-ation. Re-executing a bundle’s stored configuration reproduces that point’s realizations, so the sweep is reproducible point by point and not only in aggregate. The direct API sweep is not unreproducible per se, but data preservation varies from run to run. In our testing across runs, it produced different result schemas each time and retained raw per-point trajectories in only three cases out of five. In summary, in this cae the framework’s use of resources should be thought of as a trade-off for reproducibility and not a performance regression. 

# 4 Discussion 

The Epydemix Agent Framework shows how an infectious disease modeling library can be reliably op-erated by an AI agent through an additive interface. Across modeling tasks, agents working within the framework generally used fewer turns, fewer output tokens, and less compute than agents working directly with the Python API. In the vaccination case study, both working conditions reached the same qualitative conclusions, but the framework condition was cheaper, faster, and more consistent from run to run. The framework is designed in a way that allows validation against the parameter registry before the simulation begins. The specification stage catches invalid configurations, so users can correct them before spending compute. This mechanism explains the shift from planning toward execution seen in the case-study comparison (Section 3.2.1). The validated, self-contained configuration removes the need 13 to verify inputs through exploratory reading. The School-closure sweep task shows that the framework condition could cost more than direct API use, because it ran 18 sweep points as independent bundles. The extra cost pays off in the output’s properties rather than in a better result. Each point of the sweep survives with its configuration, its seed, and its provenance, so the sweep is reproducible point by point. In the direct API condition, that property held in just three out of five runs, and the output schema differed in all five. This does not necessarily imply that the agent committed an error. However, structured interfaces convert such properties (e.g., reproducibility) from a matter of the agent’s choices into a matter of consistency of the interface. Whether the cost is worth paying depends on the specific context. Here we implemented library control using a text-based command-line interface (CLI) rather than, for example, using a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server [18]. MCP standardizes tool discovery and invocation through a client-server connection managed by the agent host, and the state of the server nees to be managed. A CLI, instead, affords a stateless, file-based design: inputs and outputs can be inspected and versioned, and the same commands run equally well for a human or an agent, with no separate server process. If needed, nothing prevents the CLI from being exposed via an MCP server later, without changing the workflow beneath it. Our study has limitations stemming from the analysis of a single agentic coding tool and the limited set of tasks used to test the framework. Moving from the demonstrations provided here to a systematic evaluation of AI agent-driven modelling approaches will require community-defined benchmarks. In particular, the definition of a representative set of infectious disease modeling tasks with specific measures of correctness and reproducibility. Such a benchmark would turn potential failure modes documented in the agent contract into measurable outcomes, allow different models and agent tooling to be compared on the same tasks, and show which parts of this framework can be generalized beyond Epydemix. Whether open-weight models perform comparably to closed ones [8–10] should be tested on a community-defined benchmark. As AI agents become a common way to operate scientific software, interfaces designed for them, rather than for interactive programming sessions, can play a key role in making agent-driven epidemic modeling efficient, auditable, and reproducible. 

# Acknowledgements 

NG, CC and AV acknowledge partial support from the Lagrange Project of the ISI Foundation, funded by CRT Foundation. AV acknowledges support from the cooperative agreement CDC-RFA-FT-23-0069 from the CDC’s Center for Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics. The findings and conclusions in this study are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the funding agencies, 14 the CDC, or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services of the United States. 

# Declaration of AI and AI-assisted technologies use 

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used agent sessions in Claude Code from the terminal (version v2.1.198) with Claude Sonnet 5 as the underlying model, running under a Claude Pro subscrip-tion. We report verbatim prompt and output of one experiment. AI-assisted technologies were utilized for proofreading, text editing, and structural formatting. Specifically, these tools were employed to en-hance grammatical clarity, improve readability, and align the text with the journal’s style guidelines. All AI-generated suggestions were thoroughly reviewed and verified by the authors, who maintain full responsibility for the final content. 

# Authors contributions Competing interests 

Authors declare no competing interests. 

# Data availability 

The Epydemix Agent Framework is open-source software, released under the GPL-3.0 license, and is available at https://github .com/epistorm/epydemix (branch agent-framework ). The agent contract (AGENT.md ), CLI source code, and documentation described in this paper are included in that repository. The full prompt and agent output for the case study reported in Section 3 are reproduced verbatim in the main text; the agent’s plan and a step-by-step guide to reproduce the case study from scratch are reported verbatim in the Supplementary Information (SI Plan S1, SI Guide S4). 

# References 

[1] Matt J Keeling and Pejman Rohani. Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals . Princeton university press, 2008. [2] C Jessica E Metcalf, Dylan H Morris, and Sang Woo Park. Mathematical models to guide pandemic response. Science , 369(6502):368–369, 2020. [3] Chiara Poletto, Samuel V Scarpino, and Erik M Volz. Applications of predictive modelling early in the COVID-19 epidemic. The Lancet Digital Health , 2(10):e498–e499, 2020. 15 [4] Eric T Lofgren, M Elizabeth Halloran, Caitlin M Rivers, John M Drake, Travis C Porco, Bryan Lewis, Wan Yang, Alessandro Vespignani, Jeffrey Shaman, Joseph NS Eisenberg, et al. Mathemat-ical models: A key tool for outbreak response. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,111(51):18095–18096, 2014. [5] Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Grzegorz Glowaty, Felix Weissenberger, Alessio Orlandi, Dan Popovici, Anil Palepu, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno, Khaled Saab, Fan Zhang, Jacob Blum, Andrew Carroll, Kavita Kulkarni, Ne-nad Tomaˇ sev, Dina Zverinski, Ivor Rendulic, Elahe Vedadi, Florian Hasler, Luka Rimanic, Marina Boia, Ivan Budiselic, Ben Feinstein, Mathias Bellaiche, Tom Sheffer, Jan Freyberg, Jeremy Rat-cliff, Ottavia Bertolli, Katherine Chou, Avinatan Hassidim, Burak Gokturk, Amin Vahdat, Yuan Guan, Vikram Dhillon, Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav, Byron Lee, Tiago R. D. Costa, Jos´ e R. Penad´ es, Gary Peltz, Yossi Matias, James Manyika, Demis Hassabis, Yunhan Xu, Pushmeet Kohli, Annal-isa Pawlosky, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek Natarajan. Accelerating scientific discovery with co-scientist. Nature , 2026. [6] Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu, Payal Chandak, Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, Anima Anandkumar, Karianne Bergen, Carla P. Gomes, Shirley Ho, Pushmeet Kohli, Joan Lasenby, Jure Leskovec, Tie-Yan Liu, Arjun Manrai, Deb-ora Marks, Bharath Ramsundar, Le Song, Jimeng Sun, Jian Tang, Petar Veliˇ ckovi´ c, Max Welling, Linfeng Zhang, Connor W. Coley, Yoshua Bengio, and Marinka Zitnik. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature , 620(7972):47–60, 2023. [7] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Yutaro Yamada, Shengran Hu, Jakob Foerster, David Ha, and Jeff Clune. Towards end-to-end automation of ai research. Nature , 651(8107):914–919, 2026. [8] Anthropic. Claude Code. https://www .anthropic .com/claude-code , 2025. Accessed: 2026-07-02. [9] OpenAI. Codex CLI. https://github .com/openai/codex , 2025. Accessed: 2026-07-02. [10] Anomaly. OpenCode: The open source AI coding agent. https://opencode .ai , 2025. Accessed: 2026-07-02. [11] Nicol` o Gozzi, Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Corrado Gioannini, Luca Rossi, Marco Ajelli, Nicola Perra, and Alessandro Vespignani. Epydemix: An open-source Python package for epi-demic modeling with integrated approximate Bayesian calibration. PLOS Computational Biology ,21(11):e1013735, 2025. [12] Alec S. Henderson, Roslyn I. Hickson, Morgan Furlong, Emma S. McBryde, and Michael T. Meehan. Reproducibility of COVID-era infectious disease models. Epidemics , 46:100743, 2024. 16 [13] Darya Pokutnaya, Bruce Childers, Alice E. Arcury-Quandt, Harry Hochheiser, and Willem G. Van Panhuis. An implementation framework to improve the transparency and reproducibility of computational models of infectious diseases. PLOS Computational Biology , 19(3):e1010856, 2023. [14] Darya Pokutnaya, Willem G. Van Panhuis, Bruce Childers, Marquis S. Hawkins, Alice E. Arcury-Quandt, Meghan Matlack, Kharlya Carpio, and Harry Hochheiser. Inter-rater reliability of the infectious disease modeling reproducibility checklist (IDMRC) as applied to COVID-19 computa-tional modeling research. BMC Infectious Diseases , 23:730, 2023. [15] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dess` ı, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:68539–68551, 2023. [16] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 ,2022. [17] Epydemix Data: Demographic and contact data for epidemic modeling. https://github .com/ epistorm/epydemix-data , 2025. Accessed: May 2026. [18] Anthropic. Introducing the Model Context Protocol. https://www .anthropic .com/news/model-context-protocol , 2024. Accessed: 2026-07-02. 17 Supplementary Information for Driving Epidemic Models with AI Agents: the Epydemix Agent Framework 

## Nicolò Gozzi 1,2, Ciro Cattuto 1*, Alessandro Vespignani 2,11 ISI Foundation, Turin, Italy 

2 Laboratory for the Modeling of Biological and Socio-technical Systems, Northeastern University, Network Science Institute, Boston, MA, USA 

*Corresponding author: Ciro Cattuto, ciro.cattuto@isi.it 

# SI Plan S1: Agent plan (Claude Code, plan mode) 

The following is the plan produced verbatim by the agent when invoked in plan mode, prior to any execution. 

Agent plan Study: Novel Respiratory Virus in Italy — Vaccination Strategies 

Context. 

The user wants an end-to-end epydemix CLI study of a novel respiratory virus spreading in a fully susceptible Italian population, comparing four vaccination/NPI strategies (no vaccination, slow rollout, rapid rollout, combined rollout+NPIs) on hospital-capacity and attack-rate outcomes. The workflow must follow discover 

→ declare → run → inspect, use a shared base config with scenario overlays, validate every config before running, and derive transmission_rate from the target R0 via the population’s contact-matrix spectral radius (not a preset value). Deliverable: a metrics table (deltas vs. no-vaccination baseline) and a single comparison figure of hospital occupancy with the capacity line, plus a short written interpretation. Discovery already performed (read-only, in this session): • epydemix models confirms SEIR is available; CLI binary lives at /opt/anaconda3/bin/epydemix (not on default PATH — must prepend /opt/anaconda3/bin or call by full path in every command). • epydemix schema SEIR --vaccination --outcome hospitalization confirms the modular compo-sition gives exactly the compartments/parameters needed: Susceptible, Exposed, Infected, Recovered, Vaccinated, Hospitalized , params transmission_rate, incubation_rate, recove ry_rate, vaccination_rate, vaccine_efficacy, hospitalization_rate, hospitalization_rec 

1overy_rate . vaccination_rate is a constant per-capita S →V rate (not a scheduled dose campaign) — exactly matches “low/high constant per-capita vaccination rate” in the prompt. vaccine_efficac y reduces breakthrough transmission (V →Exposed since backbone has E), matching “vaccine reduces transmission by ∼85%”. • A throwaway config with this exact module combination + population: Italy validated successfully (valid: true ), confirming compartment naming ( Susceptible/Exposed/Infected/Recovered/Vac cinated/Hospitalized ) for initial_conditions .• Computed Italy’s combined contact-matrix spectral radius directly (per the recipe in 

AGENT.md “Parameter Discovery”): ρ ≈ 13 .8988 , population total 59 ,435 ,140 across groups 

[’0-4’,’5-19’,’20-49’,’50-64’,’65+’] . transmission_rate = R0_target × recovery_rate /ρ =2.5 × 0.2/13 .8988 ≈ 0.035974 .

Derived / assumed parameters. 

Quantity Value Source 

transmission_rate 0.035974 derived from R0=2.5, recov-ery_rate=0.2, Italy ρ ≈ 13 .8988 

(computed above) 

incubation_rate 0.333333 1 / mean latent period (3 days) 

recovery_rate 0.2 1 / mean infectious period (5 days) 

hospitalization_rate 0.008 0.8% of infected hospitalized 

hospitalization_recovery_rate 0.1 1 / mean hospital stay (10 days) 

vaccine_efficacy 0.85 85% transmission reduction Capacity line 55000 beds given 

vaccination_rate (no vaccination) 0.0 baseline 

vaccination_rate (slow rollout) 0.001 “low” constant per-capita rate ( ∼1/1000 day) 

vaccination_rate (rapid rollout) 0.01 “high” constant per-capita rate ( ∼1/100 day) 

vaccination_rate (combined) 0.005 “moderate”, between slow and rapid NPI reduction (combined only) school 70%, work 30% temporary, 8 weeks during the wave Simulation horizon: start_date:2024-01-01 , end_date:2025-05-01 (16 months), dt: 0.5 . n_simulation s:100 per scenario (matches AGENT.md example conventions; compartmental model at 5 age groups is cheap regardless of the 59M population size). Initial conditions (fraction mode, mirrors the Italy-population convention already used in AGENT.md ’s SEIAR example — ∼100 people seeded in each of E and I): 

Susceptible: 0.9999966350 

2Exposed: 0.0000016825 Infected: 0.0000016825 Recovered: 0.0 Vaccinated: 0.0 Hospitalized: 0.0 

Directory layout. 

Create under the repo (not scratch, since this is a real deliverable the user will want to keep and revisit): 

epydemix/studies/italy_respiratory_virus/ configs/ base.yaml scenario_no_vaccination.yaml scenario_slow_rollout.yaml scenario_rapid_rollout.yaml scenario_combined.yaml bundles/ no_vaccination.epx/ slow_rollout.epx/ rapid_rollout.epx/ combined.epx/ analyze.py # attack-rate + figure generation script 

Steps. 1. Write configs/base.yaml — shared model/population/simulation/initial_conditions: 

model: type: SEIR vaccination: true outcome: hospitalization parameters: transmission_rate: 0.035974 incubation_rate: 0.333333 recovery_rate: 0.2 vaccination_rate: 0.0 vaccine_efficacy: 0.85 hospitalization_rate: 0.008 hospitalization_recovery_rate: 0.1 

3population: name: "Italy" contact_layers: ["home", "work", "school", "community"] simulation: start_date: "2024-01-01" end_date: "2025-05-01" dt: 0.5 n_simulations: 100 initial_conditions: Susceptible: 0.9999966350 Exposed: 0.0000016825 Infected: 0.0000016825 Recovered: 0.0 Vaccinated: 0.0 Hospitalized: 0.0 

2. Write the three non-dependent overlays (each: base: base.yaml + a parameters: key-merge overriding only vaccination_rate ): • scenario_no_vaccination.yaml → vaccination_rate:0.0 (explicit, self-documenting) • scenario_slow_rollout.yaml → vaccination_rate:0.001 

• scenario_rapid_rollout.yaml → vaccination_rate:0.01 

3. Validate and run these three first (in dependency order — no_vaccination must run before we can time the combined scenario’s NPI window): 

epydemix validate configs/scenario_no_vaccination.yaml epydemix run configs/scenario_no_vaccination.yaml -o bundles/no_vaccination.epx epydemix validate configs/scenario_slow_rollout.yaml epydemix run configs/scenario_slow_rollout.yaml -o bundles/slow_rollout.epx epydemix validate configs/scenario_rapid_rollout.yaml epydemix run configs/scenario_rapid_rollout.yaml -o bundles/rapid_rollout.epx 

4. Determine the NPI window for the combined scenario: 

epydemix inspect bundles/no_vaccination.epx peak -v Hospitalized_total 

Set the intervention window to roughly 4 weeks before through 4 weeks after the median peak date ( ≈8weeks total, “a few months during the wave”), clipped to stay within the simulation horizon. 

5. Write scenario_combined.yaml :

base: base.yaml 

4parameters: vaccination_rate: 0.005 interventions: - layer: school start_date: "<peak - 4w>" end_date: "<peak + 4w>" reduction: 0.7 - layer: work start_date: "<peak - 4w>" end_date: "<peak + 4w>" reduction: 0.3 

Validate and run: 

epydemix validate configs/scenario_combined.yaml epydemix run configs/scenario_combined.yaml -o bundles/combined.epx 

6. Inspect / compare — built-in metrics (peak occupancy, peak date, days over capacity), with deltas vs. the no-vaccination baseline: 

epydemix compare bundles/no_vaccination.epx bundles/slow_rollout.epx \ bundles/rapid_rollout.epx bundles/combined.epx \ -n NoVaccination,SlowRollout,RapidRollout,Combined \ 

7. Attack rate — custom Python (per AGENT.md : attack_rate built-in metric is wrong for vaccination models; this is a leaky vaccine with a V →Exposed breakthrough transition, so both S_to_E_total and V_t o_E_total flows must be summed): 

import pandas as pd N = 59_435_140 # Italy total population, from population.total_population for name, bundle in scenarios.items(): df = pd.read_parquet(f"{bundle}/transitions.parquet", columns=["sim_id", "S_to_E_total", "V_to_E_total"]) attack = df.groupby("sim_id")[["S_to_E_total", "V_to_E_total"]].sum().sum(axis=1) / N * 100 # report median + 90% CI, and delta vs. no_vaccination median 

Assemble a single summary table: peak occupancy, peak date, days over 55,000, attack rate — each as a delta vs. no-vaccination baseline — for the three vaccinated scenarios (and absolute values for the baseline itself). 

8. Comparison figure (analyze.py , adapting AGENT_EXAMPLES.md Recipe 2 + Recipe 3): overlay median 

5Hospitalized_total (with a light 90% CI band) for all four scenarios, axhline at 55,000 with a “Capacity (55,000 beds)” label. Save to bundles/no_vaccination.epx/figures/hospital_capacity_comparison.pn g, then register with add_figure_to_manifest(...,description=...,variables=["Hospitalized_total" ]) . Report the absolute figure path to the user. 

9. Interpretation — short written summary (in chat, not a new file) covering: which strategies keep median occupancy under 55,000 beds and for how long any exceed it; how peak occupancy and attack rate scale with rollout speed (slow vs. rapid, holding NPIs fixed); and what the combined scenario’s delta implies about moderate vaccination + temporary NPIs vs. vaccination speed alone (i.e., does combining beat rapid-alone, and by how much, on peak occupancy / days-over-capacity / attack rate). 

Verification. 

• Every config passes epydemix validate with "valid": true before it is run. • After each run , confirm the bundle’s manifest.json lists the expected compartment columns ( Susce ptible_total,Exposed_total,Infected_total,Recovered_total,Vaccinated_total,Hospitalize d_total ) via epydemix inspect <bundle> manifest .• Sanity-check the no-vaccination baseline’s dynamics look like a single wave with total attack rate broadly consistent with 1 − 1/R 0-scale expectations for R 0=2.5 ( ∼85–90% of an unmitigated fully-susceptible population, tempered by the age-structured contact matrix) rather than something degen-erate (e.g., near-0% or near-100% instantly), per AGENT.md ’s warning to sanity-check dynamics after deriving transmission_rate .• Confirm epydemix compare deltas match hand-checked arithmetic for at least one metric. • Open the saved PNG (or describe it) to confirm all four curves and the capacity line are visible and legible before reporting completion. 

# SI Bundle S2: Structure of the .epx output bundle 

Every run , calibrate , or project operation writes a self-contained .epx directory. Listing shows the bundle produced for the no-vaccination baseline of the case study presented in the main text. The other three scenario bundles follow an identical layout. 

no_vaccination.epx/ manifest.json # metadata, file schema, provenance config.yaml # the configuration that produced this bundle compartments.parquet # compartment counts per simulation, date, age group transitions.parquet # daily transition counts per simulation, date, age group parameters.parquet # per-simulation parameter values figures/ hospital_capacity_comparison.png 

6manifest.json . The manifest is a single JSON file recording everything needed to interpret the bundle without opening the Parquet files: the Epydemix version, model type and compartment list, the demographic groups used, the simulation window and number of stochastic realizations, the parameter values used to produce the run, a per-file schema (column names, dtypes, and array shape) for each Parquet file, usage hints for querying the bundle via the CLI or directly in Python, and a provenance block recording the path to the exact configuration file that produced the bundle. For the baseline scenario shown here: epydemix_version 1.3.1 ; model SEIR with compartments 

Susceptible, Exposed, Infected, Recovered, Vaccinated, Hospitalized ; 5 demographic groups (0-4, 5-19, 20-49, 50-64, 65+ ); simulation window 2024-01-01 to 2025-05-01 (487 daily timesteps), with n = 100 stochastic simulations. 

compartments.parquet . One row per (simulation, date) pair — 100 ×487 = 48 ,700 rows for this study — indexed by sim_id and date . For every compartment, the file stores one column per demographic group plus an aggregate _total column, giving 6 compartments × 6 columns (5 age groups + total) 

= 36 data columns, plus the two index columns (38 columns total). Column naming follows the pattern 

<Compartment>_<group> , e.g. Hospitalized_65+ or Hospitalized_total .

transitions.parquet . Same row structure and indexing as compartments.parquet , but each col-umn records the daily flow between two compartments rather than a compartment’s standing count, following the pattern <Source>_to_<Target>_<group> (e.g. Infected_to_Hospitalized_total , Vaccinated_to_Exposed_total for vaccine-breakthrough infections). This is the file used to compute derived quantities not natively exposed by inspect or compare , such as the leaky-vaccine attack rate reported in Section 3.1 (“Case study: vaccination scenarios”) of the main text, which sums the Suscept ible_to_Exposed and Vaccinated_to_Exposed flows over the simulation horizon. 

parameters.parquet . One row per simulation, recording the parameter values used in that stochastic realization. For a run with fixed parameters (as in this case study) the file carries only the sim_id index, since every simulation shares the same parameter values already recorded once in manifest.json ; for a 

calibrate bundle, this file instead carries one column per calibrated parameter, recording the accepted posterior sample used in each simulation. 

config.yaml . A verbatim copy of the declarative configuration that produced the bundle, duplicating the model , population , parameters , simulation , and initial_conditions blocks from the originating scenario file. Storing this copy inside the bundle, rather than only referencing the path in manifest.json ,makes the bundle self-contained: the exact configuration that produced a result travels with it even if the original configuration file is later modified or deleted. 7SI Comparison S3: With-framework vs. without-framework 

This section reports run-by-run detail underlying the process and outcome comparisons in the main text, using the four with-framework runs and four without-framework runs described in the main text. 

## Process comparison 

Table 1 reports mean ± std across the four runs of each condition, split by planning and execution phase. Phase Metric With framework Without framework Planning Duration (s) 240 .2 ± 33 .0 504 .0 ± 168 .0

Cost ($) 1.43 ± 0.17 2.73 ± 0.60 

Execution Duration (s) 342 .2 ± 59 .0 331 .0 ± 99 .0

Cost ($) 1.55 ± 0.27 2.16 ± 0.86 

Total Duration (s) 582 .5 ± 82 .6 835 .0 ± 128 .8

Cost ($) 2.98 ± 0.38 4.89 ± 0.78 

Table 1: Planning, execution, and total cost and duration, with-framework vs. without-framework ( n = 4 

per condition). The without-framework condition is both slower and more expensive at every phase. The gap is proportionally larger in duration than in cost: planning takes roughly twice as long without the framework (240 s vs. 504 s) but costs about 1.9× as much ( $1 .43 vs. $2 .73 ), while execution duration is nearly identical between conditions ( 342 s vs. 331 s) despite execution cost still being ∼ 40% higher without the framework. This is consistent with the without-framework condition spending planning time reading Epydemix’s source directly rather than a validated interface description, and then executing against a less certain plan. 

## Content comparison 

All eight runs converge on the same qualitative structure: no-vaccination and slow rollout both breach the 55,000-bed capacity line for roughly a month, rapid rollout and combined both clear it in every run, and rollout speed is the dominant lever when vaccination is the only intervention available. 

Baseline. 

No-vaccination peak occupancy is tightly clustered regardless of condition: 94 ,755 –99 ,079 across all eight runs (mean 97 ,441 ± 2,202 ). 

Slow rollout. 

Unlike rapid rollout, slow rollout shows no real cross-condition split (Table 2): mean peak occupancy is within a few thousand beds between conditions ( 81 ,277 vs. 80 ,587 ), and every one of the eight runs, 8in both conditions, still breaches the 55 ,000 -bed line for roughly a month. Slow rollout is the weakest lever tested and is never sufficient to clear capacity on its own, in either condition. Metric With framework Without framework Peak occupancy (mean ± std) 81 ,277 ± 4,279 80 ,587 ± 6,843 

Peak occupancy (range) 78 ,223 –87 ,318 73 ,630 –87 ,849 

Attack rate % (mean ± std) 72 .5 ± 2.3 71 .6 ± 4.1

Days over capacity 28–31 (all 4 runs) 26–31 (all 4 runs) Table 2: Slow rollout outcomes, with-framework vs. without-framework. 

Rapid rollout. 

Every run in both conditions clears capacity (0 days over), but with markedly different variance structure (Table 3). Without-framework runs cluster moderately around a higher mean; with-framework runs are mostly very low but include one outlier (a single run that assumed a visibly more conservative rate than its three siblings), which drives the wide with-framework standard deviation. Metric With framework Without framework Peak occupancy (mean ± std) 12 ,634 ± 21 ,707 20 ,674 ± 10 ,046 

Peak occupancy (range) 1,090 –45 ,161 11 ,187 –34 ,872 

Attack rate % (mean ± std) 14 .5 ± 22 .8 25 .9 ± 10 .6

Days over capacity 0 (all 4 runs) 0 (all 4 runs) Table 3: Rapid rollout outcomes, with-framework vs. without-framework. 

Combined strategy. 

Combined outcomes are more consistent than rapid rollout in both conditions, and clear capacity in every run (Table 4). With-framework runs reach a lower mean peak and attack rate than without-framework runs. Metric With framework Without framework Peak occupancy (mean ± std) 19 ,944 ± 7,428 33 ,697 ± 6,470 

Attack rate % (mean ± std) 33 .5 ± 8.5 42 .2 ± 6.4

Days over capacity 0 (all 4 runs) 0 (all 4 runs) Table 4: Combined strategy outcomes, with-framework vs. without-framework. 

Assumed parameters. 

The prompt specifies vaccination rates and NPI magnitudes only qualitatively (“low/moderate/high constant per-capita rate”, “reduced school and workplace contacts for a few months”), so each run chose its own numeric values (Table 5). Rapid-rollout rate means are essentially identical between conditions (1.025% vs. 1.028% /day); the outlier in Table 3 is a single with-framework run that picked 0.50% /day against a 1.00 –1.30% cluster from its three siblings, i.e. the same rate-ambiguity effect that in other 9batches has shown up on the without-framework side. Slow-rollout rate means are closer between con-ditions ( 0.115% vs. 0.181% /day) than the outcome table above might suggest, and NPI magnitudes are similar between conditions and less consequential for outcomes: the combined strategy clears capacity in all eight runs regardless of the specific school/work reduction or window length chosen. Parameter Condition Slow / school Rapid / work Combined / window Vaccination rate (%/day) With framework 0.115 ± 0.015 1.025 ± 0.327 0.425 ± 0.075 

Vaccination rate (%/day) Without framework 0.181 ± 0.064 1.028 ± 0.357 0.464 ± 0.097 

NPI reduction (%) With framework 62 .5 ± 13 .0 47 .5 ± 10 .9 82 .0 ± 15 .0 days NPI reduction (%) Without framework 55 .0 ± 5.0 38 .8 ± 7.4 85 .0 ± 8.7 days Table 5: Assumed vaccination rates (slow/rapid/combined) and NPI intervention magnitudes (school/-work reduction, window length), mean ± std across runs. 

## Caveats and summary 

These are small samples ( n = 4 per condition), and a single differently-worded rate choice can flip a whole condition’s headline outcome, as seen in the rapid-rollout outlier above. With-framework content metrics were transcribed by hand from each run’s own result table, since the framework’s bundle format has no single machine-readable summary file; without-framework metrics come directly from each run’s results file. The comparison does not change the picture in the main text: the without-framework condition remains costlier and more planning-heavy, baseline dynamics converge tightly regardless of condition, and unspecified vaccination-rate magnitudes remain the single largest source of cross-run disagreement on whether rapid rollout alone suffices. Both conditions reach the same conclusion on which strategies clear hospital capacity. 

# SI Guide S4: Step-by-step guide to reproduce the case study 

This section walks through, command by command, how to reproduce the vaccination case study reported in the main text, starting from nothing but a terminal. No prior familiarity with Epydemix, the agent framework, or Claude Code is assumed. 

What you will need. 

• A computer with Python 3.9 or later and git installed. • A terminal (Terminal.app on macOS, PowerShell/WSL on Windows, or any terminal on Linux). • An AI coding agent capable of reading local files and issuing shell commands. This guide uses Claude Code, but the framework is agent-agnostic: any comparable terminal-based agent will work the same way, since it interacts with Epydemix purely through the CLI and AGENT.md .10 • An active subscription or API access for whichever agent you choose (e.g., a Claude account for Claude Code). 

Step 1 — Clone the repository and install the CLI. 

Open a terminal and run: 

> git clone https://github.com/epistorm/epydemix.git cd epydemix git checkout agent-framework pip install -e ".[agent]"

We recommend doing this inside a fresh virtual environment ( python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate on macOS/Linux, or the conda equivalent) to avoid dependency conflicts with other Python projects on your machine. 

Step 2 — Verify the installation. 

Confirm the CLI is working before involving an agent: 

> epydemix models

This should print a JSON list of available model types (e.g. SIR , SEIR , SIS ). If the epydemix command is not found even though installation succeeded, it may not be on your system PATH ; in that case, replace 

epydemix with python3 -m epydemix.cli.main in every command in this guide — the two forms are equivalent. 

Step 3 — Install and launch your AI agent. 

Install Claude Code following Anthropic’s instructions for your platform, then launch it from the repository root (the epydemix folder created in Step 1): 

> cd epydemix claude

Launching from the repository root matters: it is what allows the agent to discover AGENT.md , the contract document that tells it how to use the framework. If you are using a different agent, the equivalent step is simply to start it with the repository root as its working directory. 

Step 4 — Give the agent the case-study prompt. 

Copy the full prompt exactly as given in Section 3.1 of the main text and paste it as your first message to the agent. Optionally, invoke the agent’s planning mode first (in Claude Code, this is a mode toggle available before sending the message) to see its intended approach before it executes anything, as we did in SI Plan S1. 11 Step 5 — Let the agent run. 

The agent will work autonomously through the discover → declare → run → inspect workflow: writing configuration files, validating them, launching simulations, and querying the results, without further input from you. This typically takes several minutes, depending on the agent and simulation settings. You do not need to do anything during this step, though you can watch the agent’s terminal output to follow its progress. 

Step 6 — Locate the outputs. 

Once the agent finishes, it will report a summary directly in the chat and leave the full artifacts on disk under the working directory it created, typically: 

> studies/italy_respiratory_virus/ configs/ # the YAML configuration files the agent wrote bundles/ # one .epx output bundle per scenario (see SI Bundle S2) analyze.py # the script that produced the comparison figure

The comparison figure itself sits inside the baseline bundle’s figures/ subfolder, e.g. bundles/no_v accination.epx/figures/hospital_capacity_comparison.png .

Step 7 (optional) — Inspect the results yourself, without an agent. 

Everything the agent did is also directly usable by a human from the same terminal. For example, to see summary statistics for a single bundle: 

> epydemix inspect studies/italy_respiratory_virus/bundles/no_vaccination.epx summary -v Hospitalized_total

or to compare two bundles directly: 

> epydemix compare studies/italy_respiratory_virus/bundles/no_vaccination.epx \ studies/italy_respiratory_virus/bundles/rapid_rollout.epx \ -m peak,peak_date -v Hospitalized_total

This is the same command-line surface the agent used throughout; nothing about the bundles or the CLI is agent-specific, so any step in this guide can equally be carried out by hand. 

Troubleshooting. 

• epydemix: command not found . Use python3 -m epydemix.cli.main in place of epydemix 

throughout, as noted in Step 2. • The agent cannot find AGENT.md . Confirm you launched the agent from inside the cloned 

epydemix repository root, not a subdirectory or an unrelated folder. 12 • Results differ slightly from what presented here. Two independent sources of variation are expected. First, simulations are stochastic (Section 2, “Materials and methods”, of the main text), so small numerical differences across runs of the same configuration are normal. Second, because the prompt specifies rollout speed and intervention magnitude qualitatively rather than numerically (Section 3.1 of the main text), a different agent run may choose somewhat different vaccination rates, NPI timing or combination, or initial conditions than those reported here, provided they remain internally consistent with the prompt’s intent. The qualitative pattern — rapid rollout and the combined strategy avoiding capacity breach, slow rollout and no vaccination both breaching it — should reproduce reliably even so. 

# SI Additional Tasks S5: Experiments with Additional Tasks 

## Setup 

We compared two ways of driving Epydemix with a coding agent on a small set of 5 epidemiological modeling tasks. We compared a “baseline” condition, in which the agent only has access to the library, its documentation and its examples, against a “framework” condition in which the agent has access to our framework. We ran each of the 5 tasks 5 times for each condition ( 2 experimental conditions, 5 tasks, 

5 five independent iterations) for a total of 50 agent sessions. Multiple iterations are necessary because the behavior of agents is stochastic. The two conditions differ only in what we provide to the agent: • Baseline condition: the Epydemix library as it is in the GitHub repository, together with its documentation and worked examples as Jupyter notebooks. The agent needs to write Python code that uses the library directly. • Framework condition: the Epydemix library as above, plus the agent framework: the AGENT.md 

contract and the framework tooling (command-line interface tool). 

## Agent harness 

Each task was executed by a non-interactive Claude Code session driven by a purpose-built agent harness and started by a single initial user prompt. No user interaction was possible. The settings of the session are reported in the Table below: 13 Setting Value Agent runtime Claude Code 2.1.224, non-interactive Model claude-sonnet-5            

> Reasoning effort medium
> Tools available Bash ,Read ,Write ,Edit ,
> Glob ,Grep ,BashOutput ,KillShell
> Tools withheld sub-agents, task planning, web search and fetch Local customization disabled ( --safe-mode )Prompt single initial user message

Table 6: Agent harness configuration. The list of allowed tools was chosen so that both conditions have the capabilities required to carry out the tasks (running shell commands and writing/executing custom Python code) but nothing that would allow the agent to delegate or shortcut the work. Sub-agents and task-planning tools were withheld so that the measured effort is that of a single agent. Web access was withheld so the agent could not consult documentation outside of the Epydemix repository. The customization mechanissm of Claude Code (e.g., skills, plugins, hooks, custom agents, external tool servers) were disabled using --safe-mode ,so that the local environment of the user could not influence the runs. 

## Isolation of task runs 

Several measures were taken to isolate the task runs from one another: • Workspace: Each session received a fresh workspace from the Epydemix library’s repository. Results, scripts and transcripts from earlier runs could not reach an agent’s context. • Environment: Each task run received its own Python virtual environment, with the same set of data analysis packages together with the library’s own dependencies ( numpy , pandas , scipy ). Plotting used a headless backend. • Verification: Task run isolation was verified. Every filesystem path appearing in tool call was checked, and any path outside of the execution workspace was flagged. Across the 50 sessions reported here, no session violated the isolation constraint. 

## Execution and metrics 

Tasks were run sequentially, with the two conditions (baseline vs framework) interleaved within each iteration, so that both met comparable constraints of Claude Code (API load, rate-limit conditions, etc.). Metrics were taken from the structured event stream emitted by the agent runtime: wall-clock 14 duration, time spent in model requests, the number of model turns, errors, and token usage decomposed into input, output, cache-read and cache-creation counts. Overall, the 50 runs used 4.6 hours of agent wall-clock time and 84 million tokens. 

## Results: baseline vs framework 

The table below reports the median value of the chosen execution metrics for each of the 5 tasks, for the baseline condition and the framework condition. 

Task Metric Baseline Framework SEIRHD scenarios Wall clock time (s) 160 [146, 177] 169 [142, 767] 

Time in API calls (s) 146 [126, 153] 143 [107, 748] 

# Turns 30 [24, 37] 23 [18, 26] 

# Output tokens 12 374 [11 015, 14 188] 9 717 [9 094, 10 909] 

Cost ($) 0.785 [0.698, 0.865] 0.715 [0.634, 0.774] 

SIR calibration Wall clock time (s) 214 [163, 237] 156 [126, 164] 

Time in API calls (s) 146 [126, 158] 83 [82, 95] 

# Turns 39 [37, 44] 24 [23, 28] 

# Output tokens 12 150 [10 383, 13 471] 7 005 [5 988, 7 668] 

Cost ($) 0.892 [0.673, 0.981] 0.636 [0.614, 0.709] 

Calibrate → Project Wall clock time (s) 226 [215, 263] 119 [114, 128] 

Time in API calls (s) 197 [193, 232] 99 [95, 108] 

# Turns 43 [40, 49] 27 [25, 30] 

# Output tokens 17 229 [17 162, 20 693] 7 670 [6 527, 7 806] 

Cost ($) 1.308 [0.929, 1.384] 0.674 [0.646, 0.708] 

School-closure sweep Wall clock time (s) 292 [226, 336] 594 [377, 860] 

Time in API calls (s) 224 [170, 231] 314 [281, 425] 

# Turns 42 [27, 45] 58 [42, 73] 

# Output tokens 19 970 [11 806, 21 624] 26 312 [23 695, 36 137] 

Cost ($) 1.010 [0.545, 1.115] 1.824 [1.358, 2.519] 

Measles coverage sweep Wall clock time (s) 644 [544, 1 012] 519 [346, 668] 

Time in API calls (s) 372 [337, 436] 308 [243, 344] 

# Turns 45 [42, 53] 36 [33, 40] 

# Output tokens 33 065 [30 659, 37 857] 23 486 [21 388, 30 821] 

Cost ($) 1.560 [1.312, 1.880] 1.371 [1.195, 1.487] 

Table 7: Per-condition medians ( 5 runs per cell) with the observed minimum–maximum range in square brackets. Baseline is the bare Epydemix library, and Framework is the agent framework. 15 Task prompts 

Each task prompt was assembled from three parts: a condition-specific orientation preamble, the task body, and shared closing instructions. The preamble is the only part of the prompt that differs between the two experimental arms. Task bodies are reported verbatim in the following section. 

Preamble: Baseline condition (library only) 

You are working inside the epydemix repository. epydemix is a Python library for compartmental epidemic modeling. The library source is in `epydemix/`, the API documentation in `docs/`, worked examples as Jupyter notebooks in `tutorials/`, and an overview in `README.md`. The package is already installed in the active Python environment. Consult whatever you need, then carry out the following task. 

Preamble: Framework condition (agent framework) 

Read AGENT.md at the repo root, then carry out the following task. 

Closing instruction (identical in both conditions) 

Work only inside your current working directory -- that is the repository root for this session. Do not read or write anything outside it. Put every file you produce in a subdirectory called `outputs/` (create it). When you are done, give a short summary of your results in your final message. 

## Task bodies 

T1 (SEIRHD scenarios): Custom SEIRHD model, three intervention scenarios 

MODEL: Build a custom SEIRHD compartmental model for a respiratory pathogen in a population of 100,000: S (Susceptible) -> E (Exposed) -> I (Infectious) -> H (Hospitalized) or R (Recovered) -> D (Dead, from H) or R (Recovered, from H) EPIDEMIOLOGY: - Transmission through contact between S and I (community), and at a reduced rate between S and H (nosocomial). - Incubation period ~3 days (sigma = 0.33/day). - Infectious period ~7 days (gamma = 0.14/day). At the end of it, 5% of cases are hospitalized, the rest recover. - Hospital stay ~10 days (gamma_hosp = 0.1/day). Among hospitalized, 15% die, the rest recover. - Community transmission rate: beta = 0.45/day. Nosocomial transmission rate: beta_hosp = 0.05/day. 

16 SCENARIOS: Run three scenarios over 6 months (Sep 1, 2024 -> Mar 1, 2025), each with 200 simulations. Seed the outbreak with a tiny fraction of exposed and infectious individuals. - Baseline -- no intervention. - Early intervention -- on October 1, 2024, transmission drops 40% (beta goes from 0.45 to 0.27) until February 1, 2025. - Late intervention -- same 40% reduction, but starting November 1, 2024 until February 1, 2025. DELIVERABLES: - Check that all three model setups are correct before running them. - Run all three scenarios. - Report, for each scenario, summary statistics and peak timing for I_total, H_total, D_total. - Compute for each scenario: attack rate (%), peak hospital census (median + 90% CI), total deaths (median + 90% CI), days the hospital census exceeds 500 beds, lives saved vs. baseline. - Produce three figures: epidemic curves (I_total), hospital capacity (H_total with a 500-bed line), cumulative deaths (D_total) -- all as scenario overlays with uncertainty bands. - Summarize: what does a 30-day delay in intervention cost? 

T2 (SIR calibration): SIR calibration, posterior quality and two-parameter sensitivity 

STEP 1: Generate synthetic observed data Run a forward SIR simulation with these "true" parameters to produce synthetic outbreak data: - Population: 100,000 (default flat population) - transmission_rate: 0.35 - recovery_rate: 0.1 - Period: Jan 1 - Apr 30, 2024 (120 days) - Initial conditions: S = 0.999, I = 0.001, R = 0.0 - 1 simulation (or take the median of a few) Extract the daily Infected_total time-series from this run and save it as a CSV file (observed.csv with columns `date` and `cases`). This is the "observed data" we will calibrate against. STEP 2: Calibrate transmission_rate Set up a calibration that: - Uses the same SIR model structure and recovery_rate = 0.1 (fixed). 

17 - Defines a uniform prior on transmission_rate over [0.1, 0.8] -- deliberately wide, to test whether the calibration can recover the true value. - Uses observed.csv as the observed data. - Targets Infected_total as the comparison variable. - Uses RMSE as the distance function. - Uses the SMC strategy with 300 particles and 8 generations. Define the base model setup once and reuse it for the calibration, so that the calibration only specifies what it adds on top. Check the calibration setup is correct, then run it. STEP 3: Assess calibration quality - Inspect the posterior: what is the estimated transmission_rate? Report mean, median, std, and 95% CI. How close is the posterior median to the true value of 0.35? - Inspect the calibration fit: get the fit trajectories (quantiles 0.05, 0.5, 0.95 for Infected_total) and compare them to the observed data. - Produce a figure with two panels: - Left panel: posterior distribution of transmission_rate as a histogram, with a vertical line at the true value (0.35). - Right panel: calibration fit -- observed data as black dots, median fit as a blue line, 90% CI as ashaded band. STEP 4: Sensitivity -- calibrate both parameters Now set up a second calibration (reusing the same base model setup) that calibrates both transmission_rate and recovery_rate: - transmission_rate: uniform prior [0.1, 0.8] - recovery_rate: uniform prior [0.03, 0.3] Run this calibration (300 particles, 8 generations). Then: - Inspect the joint posterior. Report the estimated values and compare to the true values (transmission_rate = 0.35, recovery_rate = 0.1). - Produce a figure showing the joint posterior as a 2D scatter plot (transmission_rate on the x-axis, recovery_rate on the y-axis), with the true values marked as a red cross. 

18 DELIVERABLES - The observed.csv file with the synthetic data. - Two validated calibration setups (single-parameter and two-parameter), both built on a shared base. - Two sets of calibration results, with posterior and fit inspection reported. - Both figures. - A brief summary: did the calibration recover the true parameters? How tight are the posteriors? Did calibrating two parameters simultaneously make the estimates worse? 

T3 (Calibrate → Project): Calibrate, then project baseline vs intervention 

STEP 1: Generate synthetic observed data and calibrate Simulate a synthetic outbreak (afterwards, we will calibrate against it). Run a forward SIR simulation with these "true" parameters: - Population: 500,000 - transmission_rate: 0.12 - recovery_rate: 0.04 - Period: Jan 1 - Mar 31, 2026 (~90 days) - Initial conditions: S = 0.9999, I = 0.0001, R = 0.0 - 1 simulation Extract Infected_total and save as observed.csv (columns: date, cases). Run a calibration that: - Fixes recovery_rate = 0.04. - Places a uniform prior on transmission_rate over [0.03, 0.4]. - Uses the observed.csv generated above, targets Infected_total, uses RMSE distance. - Uses the SMC strategy with 200 particles and 5 generations. Validate and run the calibration. Inspect the posterior -- confirm that the estimated transmission_rate is reasonably close to 0.12. STEP 2: BASELINE projection (no intervention) Produce a projection that extends the simulation 3 months beyond the calibration period: - Starting from the simulation parameters above, change only the simulation end date to 30 June 2026. - 200 posterior samples. Inspect the results: what are the projected peak date and magnitude for Infected_total? Get quantiles (0.05, 0.5, 0.95). 

19 STEP 3: Intervention projection Produce a second projection (intervention): - Extend to 30 June 2026 (same as baseline). - Override the transmission rate, dropping it to 0.03 from April 15 through June 1 (this should drive the effective R0 below 1, suppressing the epidemic two weeks into the projection window). - 200 posterior samples. STEP 4: Compare scenarios Compare the projection results: baseline vs intervention. Report the comparison results and the deltas. STEP 5: Visualize Produce a single figure with two panels: - Left panel: epidemic curves. Plot the median projected Infected_total for both scenarios (Baseline as blue, Intervention as orange) with 90% CIs as shaded bands. Mark the end of the calibration period (March 31) with a vertical dashed line. Mark the beginning and end of the intervention. If the observed data from Step 1 is available, overlay it as black dots for the calibration window. - Right panel: cumulative attack rate. Plot the median cumulative Recovered_total (as a fraction of population) for both scenarios over the full projection period, with 90% CIs. DELIVERABLES - The synthetic observed.csv and a validated calibration output. - Two projection outputs, each inspectable after the fact. - The comparison of metrics (deltas) between the two scenarios. - A two-panel figure comparing the scenarios. - A brief summary: how much does the intervention reduce the peak? Delay it? Lower the final attack rate? Are the 90% CIs well-separated or do the scenarios overlap substantially? 

T4 (School-closure sweep): Optimal timing of a three-week school closure (NY State) 

Study the effect of a three-week school closure on a regular influenza season in New York State. SETUP - Use New York State's age-structured population and all available contact layers (home, school, work, community). 

20 - Influenza-like epidemiology, seeded with a small number of infectious individuals at the start of the season. - The season runs 1 October 2026 -> 31 May 2027. - Tune the model so that, with no intervention, the epidemic peaks around 15 February 2027. Report the peak date you actually achieve and how you got there. - Use 100 stochastic realizations per configuration. INTERVENTION A school closure removes all school-layer contacts for 21 consecutive days. Nothing else changes --the other contact layers are untouched. QUESTION Where in the season should those three weeks be placed to minimize the final attack rate, and how much does the best placement actually buy you? - Sweep the closure start date weekly from 1 December 2026 through 1 April 2027, running the full season for each start date. - Also run the unmitigated season as the reference. - For each start date compute the final attack rate (cumulative infections as a percentage of the population), the peak incidence, and the peak date. DELIVERABLES - A table of closure start date -> final attack rate, peak incidence, peak date. - The optimal start date, and the relative reduction in attack rate it achieves versus no closure. - How sensitive the benefit is to timing: how much of the benefit is lost by starting two weeks too early or two weeks too late, and the range of start dates that come within 10% of the optimum's benefit. - Two figures: - Final attack rate vs. closure start date, with the unmitigated attack rate as a horizontal reference line and the unmitigated peak date marked. - Epidemic curves over the season for three cases overlaid -- no closure, optimally timed closure, and a closure starting one month after the optimum -- with the closure windows shaded and uncertainty bands. - A short summary answering the question directly: what is the ideal placement, what relative impact does it achieve, and briefly why the optimum sits where it does. 

21 T5 (Measles coverage sweep): Measles risk in Vermont across vaccination coverage 

Study the potential impact of a measles outbreak in the state of Vermont if vaccination coverage falls into the 80%-95% range. SETUP - Use Vermont's age-structured population and all available contact layers (home, school, work, community). - Measles epidemiology in an SEIR structure: latent period ~12 days, infectious period ~8 days, and a transmission rate chosen to give a basic reproduction number typical of measles (R0 ~ 15). State the R0 you actually obtain and how you determined it. - MMR coverage is represented as immunity present before the outbreak starts: a covered individual is immune at day 0 and plays no further part in transmission. - Seed the outbreak with 5 imported infectious individuals on 1 January 2027 and run through 31 December 2027. - Use 200 stochastic realizations per coverage level. PART 1 -- Coverage sweep Sweep coverage from 80% to 95% in steps of 1 percentage point. For each level report: - the probability of a large outbreak (define a threshold, e.g. more than 1,000 cases, and say what you used), - median total cases and the attack rate **among the initially susceptible** (do not count the pre-existing immune as cases), - peak incidence and peak date, with uncertainty. PART 2 -- Imperfect vaccine The MMR vaccine is not perfect. Repeat the sweep assuming it is 97% effective, so 3% of vaccinated individuals remain fully susceptible. Does any coverage level in the 80%-95% range still reach herd immunity? PART 3 -- Age structure and targeting At 88% coverage (97% vaccine efficacy), report the age-stratified attack rate and the share of total cases falling in each age group -- in particular the 0-4 group, who are largely too young to be fully vaccinated. Then: if Vermont could run a catch-up campaign targeting a single age group, raising that one group's coverage to 98% while the rest stay at 88%, which group should it target to minimize total cases? Compare the candidate age groups, and say whether the best target is the group that carries the most cases or the one that drives the most transmission. 

22 DELIVERABLES - A table of coverage -> outbreak probability, total cases, attack rate, peak incidence, peak date, for both the perfect and the 97%-effective vaccine. - A table comparing the single-age-group catch-up campaigns. - A figure: total cases and outbreak probability against coverage, for both vaccine assumptions, with the theoretical herd-immunity threshold (1 - 1/R0) marked as a vertical line. - A figure: epidemic curves at three representative coverage levels spanning the transition, with uncertainty bands. - A short summary: over what coverage range does outbreak risk collapse, how sharp is that transition, and how does the empirical threshold compare with 1 - 1/R0? What does an 80% versus a 95% Vermont look like in absolute numbers, and where should a catch-up campaign go? 

23