Title: Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.31562v1

Published Time: Mon, 28 Sep 2026 01:27:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 55

Markdown Content:
> 2026-09-28

# Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery 

Nenad Tomašev 1, Matija Franklin 1, Atoosa Kasirzadeh 1, Vivek Natarajan 1, Alan Karthikesalingam 1, Sebastien Krier 1 and Simon Osindero 1 

> *Equal contributions, 1Google DeepMind

Recent advances in agentic Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems have marked a shift in AI for Science: moving away from the use of individual AI systems for narrow task execution, toward multi-agent systems capable of orchestrating complex, end-to-end research workflows and performing (semi-)autonomous scientific discovery. The development of multi-agent AI-for-science systems has primarily focused on improving the cognitive capabilities of AI systems, specifically by making advanced reasoning and hypothesis generation more reliable. However, focusing only on cognitive capability improvement could ignore appropriate management of resources , a key bottleneck in scientific discovery. Testing and validating scientific hypotheses and experiments is, physically and economically, resource-intensive and resources are limited. This means that to make significant advancements in autonomous scientific discovery, such as improving human-AI co-scientist complementarity or reaching a truly closed-loop automated process, we must pair ongoing improvements in reasoning capabilities with robust resource management. In this paper, we outline an infrastructure for AI resource management by developing the necessary foundations of scientific agent economies, markets, and institutions. The aim of this infrastructure is to empower AI agents and human scientists to effectively (i) collaborate and establish research priorities, (ii) assign credit, (iii) track accountability and liability, and (iv) safeguard against malicious use and information security risks. Finally, we engage with the macro-level societal implications of (semi-)autonomous scientific discovery to inform the development of governance policies ensuring an equitable distribution of AI-driven discoveries and derivative future technologies. 

Keywords: AI, AI agent, science, sociotechnical, market, economy, AI governance 

# 1. Introduction 

The rapidly growing field of "AI-for-science" (Van Noorden and Perkel, 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2021) has demonstrated impact across disciplines: in biochemistry (Anthropic Team, 2026; Avsec et al., 2025; Dalla-Torre et al., 2025; Evans et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2024; He et al., 2025b; Jumper et al., 2021; Varadi et al., 2022, 2024), medicine (Azad et al., 2023; Bluethgen et al., 2025; Chia et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2023, 2024; Lau et al., 2026; Ma et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2023), material science (Guo et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Merchant et al., 2023; Ning et al., 2026), neuroscience (Caro et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2025), physics (Birk et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2025; Park et al., 2025), mathematics (Feng et al., 2026a,b; OpenAI, 2026a,b; Tao, 2026), and beyond (Bodnar et al., 2025; Park et al., 2023; Parker et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2026). To name just a few examples, AI has been used by a team at MIT to identify Halicin as a new antibiotic compound (Stokes et al., 2020); AlphaFold’s prediction of protein structures earned the 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry (Jumper et al., 2021); genome language models have been used for designing bacteriophages (King et al., 2026), with applications in helping fight antibiotic resistance. Large language models (LLMs) and multimodal foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) as well as AI agents (Kasirzadeh and Gabriel, 2026) have become integrated in scientific work-flows (Boyko et al., 2023; Kusumegi et al., 2025), empowering human scientists to more effectively 

> Corresponding author(s): nenadt@google.com arXiv:2609.31562v1 [cs.CY] 25 Sep 2026 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

execute their routine tasks, co-ideate (Gottweis et al., 2025), and reason (Kiciman et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024a; Truhn et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2025). While these advances are promising, the rapid integration of agentic AI systems in science also raises a host of concerns (Birhane et al., 2023). Key issues include the potential impact of fre-quent AI use on idea diversity (Hao et al., 2026; Meincke et al., 2025; Traberg et al., 2026), a lack of rigor and reliability in AI reasoning and experimentation (Luo et al., 2025; Ríos-García et al., 2026; Zhu et al., 2025), scaling the risk of scientific fraud by malicious actors (Gyevnár et al., 2026), and immediate challenges to the peer review system (Mann et al., 2026; Naddaf, 2025). This more diffuse use of AI as a normal tech-nology (Narayanan and Kapoor, 2025) is comple-mented with more ambitious attempts at develop-ing closed loop autonomous "AI scientists" (Ding et al., 2026; Lu et al., 2024a, 2026; Tang et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025; Yamada et al., 2025) that build on the advancement of research capabilities in LLMs (Boiko et al., 2023). In this paper, we pri-marily focus on highly autonomous AI-for-science systems, rather than the simplistic personal use cases of LLMs by human scientists, or agentic AI systems (Kasirzadeh and Gabriel, 2026) with a low degree of autonomy lacking the ability to autonomously pursue research directions and ex-ecute scientific workflows. We name them AI sci-entist and characterise them as an autonomous or semi-autonomous AI agent capable of generating hypotheses, planning experiments, and execut-ing end-to-end scientific research workflows in a closed-loop setting with minimal human supervi-sion and intervention. These systems are typically multi-agent, meaning they are composed of sev-eral agents and principals, which can be either humans or AIs. As autonomous AI scientists mature, a key ques-tion is how to coordinate AI-driven scientific dis-covery at scale: across teams and institutions, and aligned with societal objectives. Current work focuses on individual agents or rigidly orches-trated multi-agent systems run by singular en-tities. However, science and scientific practice are ultimately collaborative, collective, and social processes (Channing and Ghosh, 2026). Hence, standards and norms around the cooperation, co-ordination, conflict, and collusion should be de-veloped (Hammond et al., 2025). More precisely, in a multi-agent system comprising N agents, be-havioural dynamics are defined by the alignment of agent goals and actions. Collaboration occurs when agents actively work together to maximise a joint utility function toward a shared objective; coordination requires only the structural align-ment of actions among independent agents to prevent interference and maintain system effi-ciency. When agent objectives are mutually exclu-sive, conflict arises, creating a zero-sum environ-ment that could degrade global utility. Collusion manifests as a form of adversarial collaboration in which a distinct subset of M agents (M < N) secretly cooperates to maximise their own collec-tive gain at the direct expense of the remaining N-M agents or the broader imposed rules and standards. Highly autonomous AI-driven scientific discov-ery at scale therefore becomes primarily a prob-lem of multi-agent coordination and collaboration over scarce resources. This framing has prece-dent: contemporary science operates within an (implicit) economy, in which researchers compete for scarce resources such as funding, laboratory access, and talent, investing effort in exchange for priority and reputation, with institutional mecha-nisms such as peer review and the tenure system serving as allocation devices (Partha and David, 1994; Stephan, 2015). Human scientific coordina-tion is also based on social trust, events, and a mix of formal and informal communication. Neither the mode nor the time-scale of these legacy mech-anisms may suit the efficiency requirements of agentic AI science. Autonomous AI agents change the scale, speed, and formality required of these coordination and conflict management mecha-nisms. Agents may instead need deterministic APIs, smart contracts, and cryptographically veri-fiable reputation and trust to coordinate under a desired degree of autonomy. As the marginal cost of generating raw scien-tific ideas or hypotheses approaches zero, the bottleneck shifts to the allocation of scarce physi-

> 2Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

cal and financial resources needed for empirical validation. Coordinating this allocation across potentially large numbers of autonomous agents, each pursuing distinct research objectives across different institutions, is an economic problem: it requires mechanisms for pricing contributions, al-locating finite resources among competing uses, and aligning incentives across entities with poten-tially divergent objectives. Multi-agent coordina-tion is also required for minimising the amount of redundant work, ensuring diversity among re-search projects, and encouraging collaboration. Therefore, we argue that a reliable and ma-ture (semi-)autonomous AI scientist ecosystem requires the development of agentic economy for science (Tomasev et al., 2025). In this economy, human researchers and AI agents will negotiate, trade, and allocate scarce scientific resources to produce new knowledge. This economy will re-quire formal infrastructure to operate at the speed and scale of autonomous agents (Jiang et al., 2025). Hence, deliberate market design (Roth, 2002) will be necessary to avoid market failures in the production of knowledge (Arrow, 1962; Nelson, 1959) and direct scientific progress to-wards the public good. The collaborative structure of scientific re-search itself reinforces this economic framing. A risk of capability-focused discourse around AI-driven research is that it reduces scientific dis-covery to a purely cognitive process, abstract-ing away the complex collaborative workflows through which science is conducted. In practice, research plans involve sequences of interdepen-dent tasks - such as ideation, experimental de-sign, physical execution, data generation, and analysis - that must be delegated (Tomašev et al., 2026) across agents and institutions, each with different capabilities and resource endowments. These delegation chains may span institutional boundaries, with tasks flowing between human researchers and AI agents. Each party within such chains needs to be compensated for their time, resources, and contribution to executing the research plan. This transactional structure, where contributions must be priced, contracts ne-gotiated, and credit assigned across distributed workflows, necessitates formal economic mech-anisms. While a part of such infrastructure may emerge organically, proactive institutional, tech-nological, and policy design may be required to avoid market failures and ensure that public-good research is appropriately funded. For AI scientists to function within collective scientific workflows, they need cost-awareness -the ability to reliably evaluate whether the ex-pected utility of pursuing a scientific hypothesis justifies its financial and material cost, especially when alternatives are available - complex, highly contextual decisions. Because impact cannot al-ways be reliably estimated in advance, priorities must be dynamically reassessed. New technolo-gies may also eventually lower the cost of specific experimental directions. Methods that improve idea ranking prior to costly evaluation are likely to prove highly valuable (Foster et al., 2026). Such comparisons also raise ethical questions, since not all outcomes are commensurable or re-ducible to economic value. Autonomous scientific discovery is thus both a technical challenge and a challenge of large-scale agentic coordination, institution and market design, and resource al-location. For example, a lack of safe and com-pliant institutional frameworks to facilitate the exchange of insights derived from sensitive or proprietary data between AI scientists limits the scope of their collaboration. We discuss this fur-ther in Sections 3 and 5. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Given that many fields of science re-quire substantial physical validation resources, Section 2 casts the problem of autonomous scien-tific discovery as a problem of resource allocation, while recognising that the elasticity of physical validation varies across fields, and that some of the bottlenecks may be possible to partially ad-dress through technological innovation. Scientific data markets are discussed in Section 3, includ-ing the economic valuation of negative results. Section 4 covers idea economies, agent-native re-search artefacts, and credit assignment. Dual-use, biosecurity, and AGI self-improvement security risks are discussed in Section 6. Section 7 con-siders the implications of science automation for international collaboration, and explores the roles of compute and human scientists. Finally, Sec-

> 3Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

tion 8 considers the present limitations of AI scien-tists with respect to creativity, cognitive monocul-ture, and opacity. We hope that such limitations can be overcome, to enable AI scientists to deliver foundational discoveries. 

# 2. The Validation Bottleneck: Cost, Re-sources, and Prioritisation 

Science is constrained by the physical and eco-nomic realities of hypothesis testing, especially as many discoveries involve long chains of smaller steps and hypotheses, each requiring validation. As the marginal cost of hypothesis generation approaches zero, the physical validation cost is likely to remain inelastic in the absence of major investments in scientific infrastructure. For AI sci-entists to accelerate scientific discovery, further adjustments are needed to both the sociotechni-cal systems in which they are deployed and the capabilities of the AI scientists themselves, given that they must evaluate and factor in the asso-ciated resource requirements and financial cost. Without deep structural interventions to manage the increased volume of AI co-derived hypothe-ses and research proposals, automated ideation will merely shift the backlog to the laboratory bench, exacerbating existing resource scarcities. Automation in scientific discovery needs to be reframed from an algorithmic challenge to a sys-temic problem of large-scale AI scientist and hu-man coordination in the allocation and utilisation of real-world resources and market design to fa-cilitate it. 

2.1. From Moore’s Law to Eroom’s Law 

Physical validation of scientific hypotheses can be both costly and labour-intensive. Consider the problem of crystal structure prediction, crucial in drug development and advanced material design. It is now possible to predict millions of new crys-tal structures computationally (Merchant et al., 2023). Verifying these predictions involves a mix of computationally expensive methods like den-sity functional theory (Oganov et al., 2019; Wood-ley and Catlow, 2008) and the physical synthesis and characterisation of materials in laboratory environments (Price, 2014). This transition from the digital to the physical is bounded by costs that vary greatly across scientific disciplines. Conse-quently, some areas of science present far greater challenges for automation than others. These costs also shift over time. Genomic se-quencing can be seen as a major success in that regard, given that the cost of full human genome sequencing has decreased by several orders of magnitude (Shendure et al., 2017). However, this is not always the case. In pharmaceutical and ther-apeutic development, Eroom’s Law describes the opposite trend (Ringel et al., 2020; Scannell et al., 2012). Clinical trials are a major factor in this increased cost (DiMasi et al., 2016; Wouters et al., 2020), due to the rising cost of patient recruit-ment, administrative staff, monitoring, and other necessary procedural steps (Sertkaya et al., 2016). Despite advances in computational drug design and high-throughput screening, the inflation-adjusted cost of developing FDA-approved drugs roughly doubles every nine years (Scannell et al., 2012). Current macroeconomic estimates project a high capitalised cost of bringing a new molecu-lar entity to market, approximated as $2.6 billion in (DiMasi et al., 2016). These high costs are accompanied by a long process that involves pre-clinical assays as well as multiple stages of clinical trials. For new drugs to prove their effectiveness, they must do so against an ever-expanding base-line of existing alternatives, making significant improvements harder to demonstrate. Accord-ingly, an AI agent proposing a novel therapeutic molecule is merely providing a starting point for what can be a decade-long process of staged clin-ical validation. Physical sciences similarly face significant ob-stacles. In materials science, some of the base materials needed for experiments are naturally scarce (De Boer and Lammertsma, 2013; Filho et al., 2023). The global supply chain for rare earth elements, such as neodymium, dyspro-sium, and gadolinium, which are critical for high-performance magnets in renewable energy and electric vehicles (International Energy Agency, 2025), is highly concentrated and subject to geopolitical factors (Baskaran and Schwartz, 2025). Furthermore, in domains such as high-energy physics and astrophysics, validation is 

> 4Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

tied to massive, centralised infrastructural invest-ments, requiring facilities like the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) (Evans and Bryant, 2008; Florio et al., 2016) or the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) (Abi et al., 2020; Murayama et al., 2023). Such facilities take years to con-struct and involve high operating costs, and AI scientists aiming to validate new theories in these domains would require access to these highly con-tested resources at a high cost per experiment. These physical constraints have significant im-plications for the impact of future closed-loop AI scientists. When AI systems are used as tools rather than operating autonomously, the burden of cost assessment falls on human domain ex-perts. For AI scientists to be granted autonomy, they must be able to factor in these constraints, and negotiate optimal trade-offs. Otherwise, AI research proposals may prove theoretically sound yet practically infeasible. The acceleration of AI-driven scientific discovery may therefore be highly jagged, with computationally verifiable fields ad-vancing more rapidly than their counterparts. 

2.2. Hard Practical Constraints 

While the elasticity of the experimental valida-tion pipeline depends on supply chain bottlenecks and financial constraints, this process is subject to additional practical constraints that may limit the physical capacity to safely and ethically test novel AI-generated scientific ideas. Scaling AI-driven scientific discovery may therefore depend on the development and deployment of custom-made laboratory robotics systems capable of effi-ciently executing experimental research protocols at scale. Could AI scientists sidestep physical valida-tion entirely by using large retrospective obser-vational datasets to both generate and validate hypotheses? There is already a large volume of scientific data, and value in examining pat-terns within it. For example, electronic health records may be used to formulate hypotheses to help improve therapeutic pathways or design better public health interventions. Nevertheless, there is a limit to this approach, with respect to Pearl’s ladder of causation (Pearl, 2018), where the observational data is confined to the lowest rung — it establishes correlations, not causes. Be-cause retrospective data only reflects what hap-pened under past conditions, it cannot reliably predict system behaviour under novel conditions unless additional restrictive assumptions are im-posed (Bareinboim et al., 2022; Peters et al., 2017; Schölkopf et al., 2021). This is not an ar-gument against retrospective data - AI scientists should utilise all available data sources to prune the hypothesis space and reduce validation costs. However, experimental validation remains neces-sary, as scientific discovery ultimately depends on identifying true causal mechanisms rather than merely establishing correlations. Simulations offer another path forward, as they enable scientists to exert more direct control over the experimental setup, and study the conse-quences of interventions conditioned on different model parameters and inputs. As such, simula-tions are highly valuable to human scientists and may play an even more important role in AI sci-ence, as coding agents may be able to rapidly instantiate simulations to run preliminary tests on their hypotheses (Boiko et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2026; Duston et al., 2025; Tian et al., 2024). The utility of this approach is well attested across disci-plines. For example, ab initio Density Functional Theory (Fattebert and Gygi, 2002) and Molecular Dynamics simulations are indispensable for gain-ing insights into complex protein-ligand binding mechanisms in drug discovery (Hollingsworth and Dror, 2018) and predicting the thermody-namic stability of novel battery electrolytes (Jain et al., 2013; Oganov et al., 2019). General Circu-lation Models are used to project climate trajecto-ries (Alizadeh, 2022), while numerical relativity templates play a role in the detection of gravita-tional waves (Abbott et al., 2016). Despite this, simulations are often crude ap-proximations of real physical processes. The ‘sim-to-real’ gap is widely recognised, and remains a challenging open problem (Abou-Chakra et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2023; Rothfuss et al., 2024). Autonomous agents are particularly good at iden-tifying unanticipated exploits and degenerate so-lutions that provide them with the implemented reward without meeting the true underlying ob-

> 5Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

jective. The automated scientific economy cannot treat simulations and digital twins as like-for-like replacements for true experimental validation. It should, however, utilise them as filters wherever appropriate, and further incentivise the develop-ment of high-fidelity simulators. Science therefore rests on the ability to inter-act with the real world, and AI scientists would need to engage with consequential physical inter-ventions in controlled experimental conditions, under notable external constraints. These constraints are particularly pronounced in clinical and translational medicine. Empir-ical validation of novel therapeutic candidates involves randomised clinical trials (RCTs) and is impossible without human volunteers, whose supply is inherently limited. Difficulties in pa-tient recruitment and retention frequently lead to delays in clinical trials or their premature termi-nation (Moffat et al., 2023). These issues could be further exacerbated by the very acceleration that AI promises for precision medicine: as AI agents become more capable and better at iden-tifying highly targeted, personalised treatments, this personalisation could lead to a fragmenta-tion of the patient pool into increasingly niche pa-tient sub-populations. Such fragmentation would make it harder to achieve the requisite statistical power without stretching recruitment timelines and introducing further delays (Hee et al., 2017). Even under less personalisation, sufficient de-mographic representation in trials is required to guarantee the generalisability of the findings and ensure equity of care. Moreover, recruiting un-derrepresented patient demographics into RCTs remains a profound challenge (Bibbins-Domingo and Helman, 2022; Clark et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2021). This is a particularly salient problem, as it impedes scaling the number of RCTs safely. Even if it were possible to run more RCTs in terms of the total number of volunteers available across the majority demographics, it would become increas-ingly hard to reach acceptable minority represen-tation. AI may help alleviate some of these issues by optimising recruitment and retention (Lu et al., 2024b), yet these mitigations may prove limited, as entrenched systemic barriers can be difficult to overcome. These barriers include the lack of trust within certain communities, proximity to research sites, and socioeconomic constraints. The principles involved with organising effec-tive clinical trials are therefore qualitatively dif-ferent from the rapid A/B testing practices (Ko-havi et al., 2020) frequently employed in soft-ware development, as such practices are logisti-cally and ethically impermissible in medical set-tings. Human subject research is bound by pre-vailing norms and bioethics mandates, and this includes the principle of clinical equipoise (Freed-man, 2017), requiring that patients only be ran-domised in case of genuine therapeutic uncer-tainty among experts. Significant societal aver-sion to continuous randomised experimentation in healthcare also exists (Vogt et al., 2024). Fi-nally, AI agents cannot accelerate biological time. Evaluating treatments for chronic conditions, on-cology, or neurodegenerative diseases inherently requires years of continual longitudinal safety and efficacy monitoring. This regulatory friction is necessary to prioritise patient safety (Pallmann et al., 2018). These hard constraints extend well beyond biomedical science, permeating physical and natural sciences. In agronomy and crop im-provement (Kumar et al., 2024), improved AI-driven (Feng et al., 2024; Wójcik-Gront et al., 2024) genomic prediction has helped with the problem of computational marker selection, only to be faced with another bottleneck, that of multi-environment phenotyping (Araus et al., 2018). The latter is strictly bounded by biological growth cycles and seasonal weather patterns. For exam-ple, if an AI agent is attempting to optimise a crop for drought resistance in realistic environmental conditions, true practical validation would need to wait for one or more growth seasons to pass across varied climates to fully assess the potential interactions. At a macro scale, ecological remediation or climate interventions (Keith, 2013) face the fun-damental planetary constraint of there being one planet that we occupy. Just as in human-driven science, if we imagine a hypothetical scenario of an AI-driven climate intervention, even assum-ing a broader participatory process, sufficient oversight, and consensus, this would introduce 

> 6Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

the risk of potentially irreversible systemic con-sequences (Hegerl and Solomon, 2009; Hulme, 2014). While this scenario is extreme relative to the power that any individual AI scientist or col-lective is likely to have at its disposal, it illustrates why some limits on permissions for autonomous real-world validation loops are necessary. On the other hand, restricting AI agents exclu-sively to simulations overly limits the empirical feedback, especially as simulations are usually not as granular and detailed as the real world that they are trying to model (Alizadeh, 2022; Smith et al., 2002). Nevertheless, weather and climate remain promising domains for ML more broadly (Bracco et al., 2025; Price et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a), as more accurate predictive models are beneficial for human experts working on these problems. These types of constraints come up across dif-ferent scientific sub-fields. For example, battery design remains a hard problem where AI may prove valuable in navigating the vast combina-torial space of possibilities (Nair and Roy, 2025; Ramesh et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2026), yet there are significant hazards with physical synthesis of requisite materials, as well as the batteries them-selves (Jeevarajan et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2024). Enabling AI agents to safely trial proposals re-mains challenging, given that some compounds and designs may prove explosive or highly toxic. To function effectively within these constrained and regulated use cases, AI agents must do more than unconstrained ideation, and there is a press-ing need for developing explicitly cost-aware AI agents. This requires appropriate benchmarks that evaluate both the accuracy and the token cost of deriving promising scientific findings and the logistical realities of research proposals, as well as their safety and ethics. Recent bench-marks evaluating LLM-driven physics and chem-istry simulations demonstrate that a failure to incorporate execution costs can render agentic pa-rameter tuning highly uneconomical compared to traditional computational approaches (Cao et al., 2026). Agents that abstract away the practical demands of empirical science would be unable to appropriately filter and prioritise ideas and re-search proposals, as they would systematically fail to consider all of the relevant parameters of the problem. Future autonomous systems should therefore aim to explicitly evaluate all the rele-vant constraints involved with pursuing scientific ideas, and project realistic resource requirements, as well as a cost-benefit analysis associated with proposals. The scarcity of physical validation resources, and the limited rate at which validation can be pursued, necessitates the development of robust frameworks for appropriate prioritisation and triage of ideas that AI agents should pursue. Com-peting hypotheses should be evaluated on their informational yield, societal value, cost, and feasi-bility, and plans should be dynamically adjusted as evidence accumulates or more promising alter-natives emerge. For example, agents should avoid pre-committing large resources to a direction be-fore sufficient evidence supports the investment. Validation could therefore effectively be staged, where ideas would be initially evaluated computa-tionally, then in further smaller-scale studies, and only later at the full scale. Biomedical research, and the design of RCTs, may help inform the de-sign of these autonomous research loops in other areas, with some domain-specific adjustments. A robust triage protocol should balance the risk of discarding promising leads prematurely against the risk of consuming scarce resources on practi-cally infeasible experiments. Established market mechanisms may prove invaluable for reaching such optimal operating regimes. 

2.3. Removing Bottlenecks 

In some research domains, autonomous valida-tion is possible and relevant constraints can be meaningfully incorporated into validation loops under an acceptable level of risk. Such use cases effectively expose physical experiments as pro-grammable services. Notable examples can be seen in automated computational laboratories, contract research organisations (CROs) and au-tonomous biomedical and chemical laboratories, enabling the instantiation of tightly integrated, closed optimisation loops (Bayley et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024; Duo et al., 2025; Fushimi et al., 2025; Ha et al., 2023; Lunt et al., 2024; Mirowski and Van Horn, 2005; Seifrid et al., 2022; Szymanski 

> 7Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

et al., 2023; Tom et al., 2024). CROs offer out-sourced research services for specific stages of the research process, enabling institutions to delegate tasks rather than complete end-to-end research in-house. They are presently employed frequently in biotechnology applications, helping with pre-clinical and clinical research, and with regulatory approvals. This model could be expanded to pro-vide targeted services for AI scientists in applica-ble domains. Different disciplines may therefore experience different rates of AI acceleration de-pending on how well they can remove validation bottlenecks, to enable AI scientists to more rapidly iterate and test hypotheses. Formal and theoretical disciplines may there-fore experience greater initial acceleration from AI-assisted discoveries. Mathematics is one such example, where there has been rapid progress from early benchmarks and notable below-research-level achievements like the medal-level performance on mathematics Olympiad problems (Chervonyi et al., 2025; Hubert et al., 2025), to a steady pace of novel proofs being gen-erated for open research-level problems (Feng et al., 2026a,b; Tao, 2026), advances in formal-ization (Anthropic, 2026) and also long-standing Millennium-prize problems (OpenAI, 2026a). The way in which the solution to the Navier-Stokes problem was achieved is quite illustra-tive, given that the breakthrough had involved a large-scale multi-agent deployment of the most advanced frontier models. The achievement was therefore fairly capital-intensive, showcasing that even in theoretical domains one has to consider computational bottlenecks, and what cost is per-missible for each open problem. Theoretical computer science has been another domain where rapid progress has taken place, with AI systems developing new, improved algo-rithms (Fawzi et al., 2022; Novikov et al., 2025). The ability to automatically verify these results in formal languages, like Lean (Moura and Ullrich, 2021; Ying et al., 2024), has greatly reduced the cost of validation and removed a critical bottle-neck. For the other areas of science to experience similar acceleration, validation bottlenecks need to be addressed. In biomedical science, there are ongoing efforts to utilise AI to remove some of the very bottle-necks that stand in the way of effective research automation. For example, advanced AI-driven patient matching platforms may be able to ad-dress the recruitment bottleneck in clinical trials, by reducing the manual effort involved with re-viewing charts and screening electronic health records (Askin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025; Gong et al., 2026). Predictive models can help identify the most promising therapeutics and re-ject those that are unlikely to pass through subse-quent clinical trials, thereby reducing the average cost of developing a successful therapeutic (Aliper et al., 2023; Harrer et al., 2019). Autonomous laboratory operating systems, on the other hand, are looking to standardise and streamline au-tonomous validation (Gao et al., 2025; Reder et al., 2023). Finally, there may be an important role for hu-man experts in helping reduce the validation bot-tlenecks in the short-term, in cases where tacit laboratory knowledge and human judgment can help prune out proposals and reprioritise incom-ing AI scientist requests. 

# 3. The Data Economy and Intelligent Delegation 

Physical experiments are expensive, so the data they produce is scarce and valuable. For AI sci-entists to effectively leverage prior insights for improving research prioritisation and minimis-ing physical bottlenecks, they need access to the broadest available scientific data relevant to each research problem. However, this conflicts with current data sharing practices in scientific re-search. While some datasets are made openly accessible, others remain private, and are ei-ther shared privately on request, or never shared across institutions. To overcome these barriers, it may be necessary to create formalised, agent-accessible scientific data economies to facilitate 

intelligent task delegation 1 and secure information 

> 1Intelligent task delegation is a framework for AI agent delegation centred on clear roles, boundaries, reputation, trust, transparency, certifiable capabilities, and verifiable task execution (Tomašev et al., 2026). It encompasses task decomposition, capability matching, transfer of authority and accountability, and continuous performance monitoring
> 8Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

exchange. 

3.1. The Scientific Data Market 

To facilitate collaboration and enable repro-ducibility of published research, contemporary research practices heavily rely on promoting open access to articles, research protocols, source code and experimental data (Arzberger et al., 2004; Burgelman et al., 2019; Evans and Reimer, 2009; Murray-Rust, 2008; of Sciences et al., 2018; Uhlir and Schröder, 2007). Open scien-tific databases (Horton et al., 2025; Raulusevi-ciute et al., 2024), like the AlphaFold Protein Structure Database (Varadi et al., 2022), play an important role in accelerating research. Yet, not all data is open, especially not in industrial research domains with massive capital expendi-ture, where such empirical data may hold a high commercial value. While such commercial in-centives may not stand in the way of open data sharing in academia, open access principles are not universally followed there either (Andreoli-Versbach and Mueller-Langer, 2014). For highly valuable proprietary data, strict siloing presents a structural inefficiency (Esanu et al., 2003) on a macro scale. AI scientists reasoning exclusively over public-domain data may propose hypothe-ses and experiments that have previously been rejected by human or AI scientists embedded in private research entities, wasting scarce physical resources and slowing down the pace of discov-ery. Furthermore, such risks would be particularly relevant in case of the emergence of cognitive monoculture across AI scientists, as this would lead to a more substantial overlap in ideation. To mitigate these effects, there is an opportunity to rethink and restructure data sharing in the sci-entific community, by developing economic and sociotechnical frameworks to incentivise the safe, compensated exchange of proprietary scientific data, within a regulated, structured scientific data market. This proposal complements the more estab-lished present-day use of agentic AI, in particular the common practice that involves proprietary data holding entities investing in their own inter-

> under specified constraints.

nal infrastructure for serving AI agents, including early prototypes of AI scientists - that is, bringing agents to data, rather than data to agents. For some use cases, this will remain the preferable approach, especially for scientific workstreams that are sufficiently narrow that the entirety of the required data is already available locally. Yet many scenarios will arise where this assumption does not hold and where access to diverse data sources, or to institutions that can generate ad-ditional high-fidelity data on demand, would be highly valuable - leading to agentic scientific data markets. A functional scientific data market requires ro-bust mechanisms to price and license valuable data. For an AI scientist, the value of data is highly contextual, as it depends on the role it may play in the pursuit of specific research plans. Static pricing models are poorly suited to agentic workflows. Instead, data queries should ideally be priced by the uncertainty reduction they offer for a particular research question. This is notoriously hard to evaluate ahead of time in the general case, and technical innovation is likely required to establish protocols that would allow for this value to be interactively determined in a way that meets the needs of both parties, while respecting privacy and information security. One important use case involves AI scientists utilising data to train bespoke ML models across different scientific data modalities. A possible av-enue would be to consider approaches broadly inspired by the data Shapley value (Ghorbani and Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2022), the Banzhaf value (Wang and Jia, 2023), influence functions (Koh and Liang, 2017), or RL data valuation (Yoon et al., 2020), to complement the static pricing approaches in use cases when such metrics are computationally tractable and convenient. In cases when fast feed-back loops are available, and when these metrics are tractably computable, they enable a computa-tion of the marginal contribution of data blocks to final model predictions, enabling more fine-grained evaluation of data value. For any such approximations (Garrido-Lucero et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2019) or related proxy heuristics to be useful, however, they must be computable before-

> 9Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

hand (Navia-Vázquez et al., 2025), allowing AI agents to calculate pricing bids before commit-ting capital. Further innovation in this space may be required, given how computationally intensive most of the existing approaches are, to identify the practically justifiable trade-offs between ac-curacy and cost. An increasingly prominent use case involves research-augmented generation (RAG) and in-context learning in AI scientists. If AI scientists can pull the relevant data into context at infer-ence time, and derive value from it, RAG-centered data markets may become more relevant. Note that AI scientists are, in the context of RAG, not restricted to loading raw data entries, they may also load summaries, and run scripts against the data to obtain plots and other artefacts. To en-sure fair compensation for data creators, RAG data markets should be based on non-exploitative exchange models (Zhang et al., 2026). The scientific data market would also need to support fractional and retroactive licensing agreements. One way of achieving this would be through the tokenisation of scientific intellec-tual property via smart contracts (Bodó et al., 2018), enabling automated micro-royalties. For example, if an AI scientist purchases access to a pharmaceutical company’s historical assay data and subsequently discovers a patentable thera-peutic, the embedded smart contract ensures that the original data providers automatically receive a legally guaranteed, proportional dividend of the realised revenue. Because the impact of any specific dataset on a discovery may always be con-testable, smart contracts should include dispute resolution clauses specifying the trusted third par-ties or institutions responsible for adjudication. The scientific data markets must also include advanced privacy-preserving computational in-frastructure. Data providers must be given suffi-cient guarantees that permitted external queries will not lead to unauthorised data exfiltration. Ta-ble 1 shows a plausible tiered model for scientific data access, where different use cases map onto different technologies and permission levels. Se-cure computing paradigms (Li et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2020) would be key in safely enabling the more restrictive access tiers. By utilising Trusted Execution Environments, an institution can host a proprietary dataset within a secure hardware enclave (Bahmani et al., 2021). Once granted query permissions, an external AI scientist could upload a query script to this environment and extract only the minimally required insights as summaries to inform its further research plan-ning and ideation. Zero-Knowledge Proofs (Gold-wasser et al., 1989) may be utilised to prove the established causal properties or statistical signifi-cance without revealing the underlying data. Should such scientific data markets be estab-lished for the agentic web, they would require not only the appropriate technical infrastructure, but also meaningful regulatory oversight. Such over-sight must guarantee both fair cross-institutional access and information security when handling sensitive data. Antitrust frameworks for agen-tic data markets would establish fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory licensing terms for scien-tifically critical datasets, akin to the regulation of standard-essential patents in the telecommu-nications industry. Given the dual-use potential of specific data classes, regulatory bodies must also impose hard boundaries on the market. Cer-tain highly sensitive data classes must be legally restricted from open market exchange, requiring special permissions and credentials, under highly monitored delegation protocols. 

3.2. Safe Access to Sensitive Data 

While cryptographic primitives, clearly defined access permissions and appropriately set pricing mechanisms may enable AI scientists to gain ap-provals for access to proprietary commercial data, these basics are structurally insufficient for the highest tier of restricted information, and likely similarly inadequate for commercially sensitive domains. In many domains, relevant data is in-trinsically non-transferable. For example, data in the form of longitudinal electronic health records (EHRs), high-resolution genomic cohorts, and pathogen surveillance logs carry profound pri-vacy risks and biosecurity implications. Under contemporary regulatory regimes, including the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act in the United States and the General Data Protection Regulation in Europe, the exfiltration 

> 10 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

Table 1 | Scientific Data Access Tiers 

Access Tier Modality Target Data Type Technical Mecha-nisms Economic Model Tier 1 Open Access Foundational knowledge, con-sensus literature, public databases. Public APIs, stan-dardised machine-readable data for-mats. Free, Public Good. 

Tier 2 Gated De-identified insti-tutional data, pre-competitive consor-tium data. OAuth for Agents, verifiable creden-tials, centralised access logs. Subscription, Consortium mem-bership. 

Tier 3 Monetised Queries Proprietary physical assays, high-value corporate R&D logs. Differential privacy budgets, Zero-Knowledge Proofs. Pay-per-query micro-transactions via smart contracts. 

Tier 4 Confidential Highly sensitive, non-transferable data (e.g., ge-nomics, EHRs). Secure Enclaves (TEEs), Federated Learning (FL), Secure Multi-Party Computation. Utility-based royal-ties. of such data, or its unmediated exposure to exter-nal, globally operating AI agents, is strictly pro-hibited (Price and Cohen, 2019; Rajpurkar et al., 2022). These frameworks are well established, though they may still see future updates and ex-tensions to adjust to the changing AI usage land-scape (Marks and Haupt, 2023). Furthermore, traditional de-identification, pseudonymisation and anonymisation techniques are increasingly in-adequate, as advanced machine learning models have demonstrated that it may be possible to rei-dentify individuals within such datasets (Bonomi et al., 2020; Rocher et al., 2019). Should any such data, even in its anonymised form, take part in the future agentic scientific data economy, estab-lished support for distributed, privacy-preserving execution is needed. AI scientists must there-fore engage in intelligent AI delegation (Tomašev et al., 2026), adapted to the safety requirements of these use cases. Because it would not be permissible to move sensitive data or grant direct access to it, hypothe-ses must instead be tested by the data provider’s own certified AI scientist agents. This suggests a shift from individual agentic reasoning to a distributed, collaborative, multi-agent AI science rooted in federated learning principles (Cheng et al., 2024; Kuang et al., 2024; McMahan et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2025b). External AI scientists would require means to interact with scientific institutions via their own agentic scientific API, and engage with specialised proxy agents. The autonomous scientific workflow would be divided into clearly defined roles. The external AI sci-entist, in the role of the principal, formulates the research plan and identifies the key datasets required to answer the relevant research ques-tions. It engages in negotiation with the data holder, scoping a well-defined task that may be performed by an internal AI scientist agent, or a human expert, within a secure network internal to the institution, while adhering to necessary data protection practices. A complementary ap-proach places all parties’ data and computation within a shared secure enclave, where inputs and outputs are tightly controlled; this may be prefer-able when private data from multiple providers 

> 11 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

must be jointly analysed. Safe scientific delegation protocols need to inte-grate advanced access control solutions, verifiable compute, smart contracts, and cryptographic out-put sanitisation (Kuo et al., 2017). Even if not directly accessing the data, and even under the assumption that the institutions are able to en-sure appropriate safeguards on their end and in-volve human experts in the loop for sensitive data queries, it would still be imperative to require all participating agents and institutions to hold certi-fication reflecting their compliance. When a "Re-quest for Analysis" is submitted to the host institu-tion’s gateway, it should be accompanied by ver-ifiable credentials, and the request itself should be intent-mapped to pre-approved use cases that the institution has demonstrated the ability to safely process. Smart contracts should subse-quently be established between the parties, act-ing as computable Data Use Agreements (cDUA). Such cDUA should be able to automatically verify the principal’s computational budget, ethical per-missions, insurance policies, and financial com-pensation. The operational boundaries of the del-egate should similarly be agreed upon. Depend-ing on the details of the request and the contract, additional human review may be required prior to approvals. Upon approval of the smart contract, the as-signed institutional delegates would take up the task and perform the agreed-upon analysis on the internal TEE. These delegatees would operate un-der the minimum permissions required to meet the request. Requests would need to be concrete, and not open-ended, to appropriately scope the data access permissions for the assigned internal agents. As soon as the request is met, these dele-gatees would terminate. Prior to sharing results, they would need to undergo review and if appli-cable have rigorous privacy-preserving measures applied. These transformations should be applied in a way that ensures the appropriate differential privacy of the underlying data (Dwork, 2008), en-suring that the principal cannot reverse-engineer any part of the original data based on the result of the query. 

3.3. Valuing Negative Results 

Current scientific practice faces a persistent chal-lenge in sharing negative results. As it stands, there is a strong bias towards sharing and pub-lishing positive findings, rather than negative ones (Callaham et al., 1998; Dirnagl and Lau-ritzen, 2010; Heesen and Bright, 2025; Mlinarić et al., 2017). Many reasons underlie this trend. Often, negative findings constitute failures to achieve progress, and as there are many ways to fail, and few ways to succeed, little value is attached to failing to establish an effect. This can sometimes happen due to limits in the applied research methods, but also because the negative outcomes constitute evidence against specific hy-potheses. In either case, failure to share such re-sults may result in other teams wasting resources recapitulating the findings. Failure to share oc-curs partly because writing up research papers is time-consuming and carries an opportunity cost. Finally, negative findings are inherently difficult to interpret, as they typically constitute an ab-sence of a positive effect rather than its defini-tive disproof. Yet, AI scientists may not face the same obstacles to sharing them: writing up and disseminating a comprehensive summary of neg-ative results can be done automatically, quickly, and at low cost. This presents an opportunity for more effective sharing of negative data, though it introduces technical challenges that we discuss below. Reporting negative results might be a neces-sity for collaborative AI research. If the founda-tion models underpinning AI scientists lack suffi-cient diversity, the resulting cognitive monocul-ture makes it far more likely that disparate agents will follow the same research paths, conditioned on the same knowledge base and publicly acces-sible data. If these research paths are infeasible, and such information is not shared, AI scientists would risk wasting resources collectively pursu-ing the same dead ends. Preliminary studies have confirmed that the null result gap induces biases towards positive findings in current prototypes of AI scientists (Chauhan, 2026). Given the physi-cal bottlenecks for scaling autonomous research, such an outcome would further reduce the impact of AI deployments within scientific institutions. 

> 12 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

The dissemination of negative results requires appropriate market incentives. Operationalis-ing this runs into some fundamental economic hurdles, including Arrow’s Information Paradox ,which states that the value of information cannot be assessed by a buyer without the information being revealed, but once revealed, the buyer has no further incentive to pay for it. If an institu-tion advertised that a molecule has failed as a catalyst, an external agent would absorb this in-formation for free. Institutions sharing negative findings that were costly to uncover would not be compensated. To be rewarded, AI scientists may refrain from pursuing high-risk ideas, opting for safe incremental research. Several mechanisms may address these eco-nomic hurdles. Negative result registries could operate under a tiered pricing model: a base sub-scription grants access to summaries, while re-trieving full experimental details of a specific re-sult incurs an additional per-query fee. Separate licensing fees could apply when the information is utilised in downstream research or incorpo-rated into other scientific reports. However, this model may not always be appropriate, as in many cases the negative result itself holds immense value even without the full technical detail. Con-trolling such tiered information flows would also require additional safeguards. An alternative is a cryptographic execution registry. Under this mechanism, institutions publish hashes of the in-put parameters for all executed experiments to a decentralised ledger. When an AI scientist for-mulates a research proposal its parameters are similarly hashed and registered. If formulated through a shared ontology, potential collisions with prior work can be identified without reveal-ing the state of that work or its outcome. To access further details, the agent could escrow a fraction of its budget via a smart contract to unlock the associated experimental data, with disclosure tiered depending on relevance. This enables AI scientists to avoid redundant and po-tentially expensive work, while compensating the original institution for pioneering efforts that may not have yielded a positive result. Technical difficulties would need to be ad-dressed for this to be practically viable. One obsta-cle is the semantic fragmentation of legacy scien-tific data, as historical experiments are reported in different ways, using different units, and ex-ecuted on different instruments. These discrep-ancies make it difficult to automatically establish equivalence between different instances. While the scientific community has championed FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) data principles (Mons et al., 2017), existing im-plementations have been optimised for human interpretation. A transition towards agent-native ontologies is needed, where LLMs may be de-ployed as semantic translation layers to produce the canonical representation that conforms to an agreed-upon standard. Ongoing work on apply-ing FAIR principles within computational work-flows (Wilkinson et al., 2025) aims to provide recommendations for how to increase the value of these assets. Yet prior findings should not be taken as ab-solutes. A null result may emerge from trace impurities, equipment drift, contamination, or subtle methodological errors, and some level of redundancy in scientific research is healthy as it helps identify and correct such mistakes. AI scientists should not uncritically trust all prior work, negative or positive, so as not to prema-turely commit to or abandon future research di-rections. Recent empirical evaluations confirm this risk: while preserving failure traces acceler-ates progress by pruning known dead-ends, they can also rigidly constrain agents from revisiting hypotheses that might succeed under slightly dif-ferent conditions (Liu et al., 2026). These considerations should inform the pricing of both negative and positive data within the sci-entific data economy. Scientific discovery markets should adopt clearly organised metadata ontolo-gies, ensuring that results attract financial pre-miums only when bundled with comprehensive provenance graphs covering environmental condi-tions, batch numbers, robotic telemetry, and other relevant experimental metadata. Because science is performed in a dynamic environment (e.g., vac-cine research depends on current immunity levels and circulating viral strains), the financial value of findings may sometimes diminish over time as the circumstances change. Formally tracking this 

> 13 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

depreciation may help enable automatic detection of experiments that warrant replication. Providing financial compensation for negative results must be done carefully, as subsidising an asset incentivises its overproduction. Rogue en-tities may engage in data farming - generating large volumes of meaningless experiments to pas-sively mine licensing fees from the execution reg-istry. While brute-force farming across the vast combinatorial space of scientific work would be impractical, an intelligent agent could anticipate which queries are likely to be relevant and target its efforts accordingly. More critically, adversarial actors could intentionally log falsified negative results to manipulate or obstruct the research of rivals, a form of data poisoning (Goldblum et al., 2021). To safeguard the integrity of the nega-tive data commons, the market design should incorporate epistemic staking. When an insti-tution registers a failed experimental trace for monetisation, the associated smart contract re-quires it to lock a financial stake proportional to the requested licensing premium, which can be claimed if subsequent audits establish that the data was poisoned or farmed. One notable risk is that this mechanism favours well-capitalised institutions that can afford prolonged escrow, po-tentially creating asymmetric risk appetite where better-funded groups can more easily monetise both positive and negative outcomes. Given that larger groups can also more easily diversify their research portfolio, this dynamic is difficult to fully avoid. 

# 4. The AI Idea Economy 

While secure and fairly priced markets for sci-entific data are a prerequisite for collaborative agentic science, AI-driven acceleration in idea generation is likely to play a central role in how AI scientists get integrated into scientific work-flows. As the marginal cost of ideation approaches zero (Agrawal et al., 2022), AI scientists will be able to traverse vast combinatorial spaces and generate large numbers of theoretically plausible hypotheses and research proposals in short spans of time. Present-day systems frequently suffer from an ideation-viability gap (or the hypothesis-validation gap), as seemingly novel hypotheses proposed by AI scientists often prove unviable under rigorous experimental validation (Si et al., 2025). While AI agents excel at structured re-trieval, their generated ideas consistently de-grade upon physical or computational implemen-tation (Kong et al., 2026). This gap emerges due to unmodelled practical constraints or sub-tle methodological flaws. Consequently, there is a need for mechanisms to filter through AI ideas, and ultimately - assign value. Virtual agent economies offer a potentially useful framework for establishing markets of scientific ideas and research proposals, as well as the underlying sci-entific data. In such an idea economy, the goal is an incentive-aligned scientific market designed to evaluate, price, and trade AI-generated theo-retical proposals and experimental designs prior to their physical execution. Before engaging with the proposal for estab-lishing such scientific markets, it is important to consider whether the current basic units of scientific exchange are appropriate, or whether significant adjustments to established practices may be required. 

4.1. Agent-Native Research Artefacts 

In human science, and the ’economy’ of human scientific ideas, research papers play a central role as self-contained units of idea exchange. Re-search papers are typically shared as static PDF files, though preprint servers support versioning, or rendering in HTML. Such static files are con-venient and appropriate for human readers, but they were not specifically designed to serve au-tonomous AI workflows. Compiling iterative re-search into linear narratives that often fail to cap-ture the true process of knowledge creation re-sults in an engineering tax (Liu et al., 2026). This tax is reflected in the gap between presenting convincing reviewer-targeted prose and detailed agent-executable specification. Methodology sec-tions frequently abstract away some of the de-tailed parameters required for an AI agent to re-liably replicate a result. Ongoing efforts aim to reduce this friction. For example, recent work in Earth sciences introduced the notion of knowl-edge infrastructure , defined as an agent-actionable 

> 14 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

scaffolding of modelling operators and diagnos-tic recovery mechanisms that allows AI agents to autonomously execute complex simulations (Li et al., 2026b). More importantly, there is an op-portunity to transition towards Agent-Native Re-search Artefacts (Liu et al., 2026) to accompany the human-readable narrative reports. While AI-native scientific reports represent a new trend, the desire to rethink scientific reporting is not new (De Smedt et al., 2020; Groth et al., 2010; Schultes et al., 2022; Soiland-Reyes et al., 2022; Strijkers et al., 2011). AI-native research arte-facts would represent a shift away from passive documents to active, machine-executable knowl-edge packages, disaggregated into multiple lay-ers that can be individually queried to obtain the relevant level of technical detail. A cogni-tive layer would define the formal set of hypothe-ses and reasoning informing the study, a physical layer would encapsulate the executable code with full parameter specification, an evidence layer may contain links to versioned public datasets, or privacy-preserving descriptions of proprietary data that was used, whereas a trajectory graph would encode the exact iterative process that was undertaken by an AI agent. Structured frame-works for representing research processes as evi-dence graphs have recently been proposed (Ren et al., 2026). As such verbose agentic logs may ultimately be illegible to human domain experts, relying pri-marily on agent-native scientific artefacts may stand in the way of effective human oversight, which would be especially problematic in sensi-tive and highly consequential domains. This limi-tation may be approached by decoupling the stor-age of scientific knowledge from its presentation. Research papers may be dynamically aggregated, as ephemeral user interface (Aspuru-Guzik et al., 2025; Harper, 2024; Head et al., 2021). Some of these dynamically aggregated snapshots may be stored and versioned to enable easier cross-referencing in human scientific discussions and communication. Such snapshots could be auto-generated when major scientific milestones are reached within their respective workflows, when there are results that are especially noteworthy and deserving of broad dissemination and deep discussion. For human science, it may be far more challenging to incorporate directly into this frame-work, though it may still be possible to at least partially do so in certain domains, by relying on agentic research managers that would passively collect traces of human scientific activity (Higgins et al., 2022; Redyuk, 2019) through unobtrusive monitoring for subsequent reporting. Given that such tentative solutions would involve significant privacy challenges, their feasibility is far less clear and would require extensive debate. As for AI agents, this level of oversight may prove useful not only for knowledge dissemination but also for AI safety. 

4.2. The Scientific Idea Market 

Aiming to establish an objective value of a sci-entific hypothesis prior to its rigorous empirical validation is challenging, and not always possible. Historically, early proponents of prediction mar-kets theorised the concept of "Idea Futures" (Han-son, 1995), arguing that liquid markets could aggregate dispersed knowledge to more reliably establish whether scientific claims are valid, com-pared to established processes and expert review panels. Despite empirical evidence that human prediction markets can predict the reproducibil-ity of experiments (Altmejd et al., 2019; Dreber et al., 2015), such markets suffer from cognitive biases, high friction, and a limited scale of par-ticipation. AI scientists may enable such evalua-tion at scale, potentially through high-throughput, synthetic scientific prediction markets. Recent studies suggest that diverse groups of AI agents, conditioned to act under distinct epistemic per-sonas, can independently evaluate, debate, and accurately predict the replication outcomes of published research (Rajtmajer et al., 2022). The design of scientific idea markets would need to address the risk of market manipula-tion, which can take many forms. For example, the agent identity and trust infrastructure should aim to safeguard against Sybil attacks (Douceur, 2002; Levine et al., 2006), where malicious par-ties may dynamically instantiate a large number of agents under obfuscated identities. Swarms of coordinated agents could then act in unison to ar-tificially inflate the priority of ideas on the market. It may eventually be possible to grant AI scientists 

> 15 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

persistent identity (Vidal and Monperrus, 2026), though this remains an open research question, given the complexities of assigning identity to agents that can be copied, create sub-agents, or modify their own scaffolds. Strict institutional identity verification is needed, coupled with mechanisms like stak-ing (Buterin et al., 2019) and reputation-weighted influence (Chan et al., 2025; Lou et al., 2025; Mui et al., 2002; Pinyol and Sabater-Mir, 2013). Market activity should also be monitored, to automatically identify collusion (Gomes et al., 2024; Palshikar and Apte, 2008; Rodríguez et al., 2022), and suspicious activity. Under the assumption that these agentic pre-diction markets could be made reliable, and that safeguards are put in place to encourage diverse ideation, critical reflection, and mitigate systemic bias and cognitive monoculture, this could be an important building block in establishing an idea economy, enabling autonomous AI scien-tific collectives to efficiently triage millions of untested hypotheses, steering resources towards those with the highest expected utility. To for-malise this economy and align the incentives of purely computational AI ideators with physically resourced validation labs, we propose a struc-tured Hypothesis Exchange Pipeline. This frame-work tokenises scientific ideas, treating them as tradeable epistemic assets. It relies heavily on primitives emerging from Decentralised Sci-ence (Ding et al., 2022; Weidener and Spreck-elsen, 2024), structuring the lifecycle of an au-tomated discovery into four deterministic phases as shown in Table 2. The deployment of IP-NFT V2 protocols (Ortlepp, 2022) is already enabling BioDAOs to fund early-stage research by wrap-ping legal IP rights into modular, fractionalised tokens. Decentralised networks are therefore en-abled to manage governance rights, coordinate funding rounds, and execute automated royalty distributions. However, decoupling computational ideation from physical execution introduces a vulnerability known as the "oracle problem" (Caldarelli, 2020). For a smart contract to automatically disburse a dividend upon the successful validation of an IP-NFT, or to release a replication bounty to an in-dependent laboratory, the digital ledger requires definitive proof of a physical event. Should these proofs be manually reported, there is potential for erroneous or fraudulent entries to compro-mise these payments. Malicious actors may fabri-cate experimental data to make their claims seem more legible. To extend the validity and security beyond the digital into the physical space (Peccoud et al., 2018), the agentic scientific infrastructure may need to enforce unbroken, cryptographically veri-fied chains of custody utilising hardware roots of trust (RoT). This would set the expectation for the participants in the scientific economy, for entities like cloud laboratories, to safeguard the integrity of their instruments with secure hardware en-claves integrated at the sensor level. Streams of raw measurements would then be cryptographi-cally signed and hashed, along with secure times-tamps and machine parameters. Jointly, this data would constitute an immutable proof of execution ,enabling automated verification of experiments executed on certified instruments. Additional monitoring may be necessary to safeguard against physical sensor spoofing, to similarly be able to confirm provenance of compounds prior to their measurements. Such verification would improve safety of smart contracts between AI scientists. Market-driven evaluation mechanisms would serve as a structural disincentive against spam-ming of trivial incremental ideas, by rewarding consequential discoveries that deliver the most positive impact, or lead to the deepest theoretical insights. In such markets, we can think of ideas as call options, where the price of the option is dynamically scaled, granting novelty premiums to proposals that aim to challenge established scientific consensus, provided that they are later experimentally validated. Novelty is not the sole consideration; the likely depth of scientific im-pact, downstream public good, execution cost, and risk are equally important. Scientific idea markets would enable a struc-tural decoupling of ideation from physical execu-tion, at different stages of scientific work. Real-world science often involves much more back-and-forth between the two stages as evidence is being accumulated, though having clear separation be-

> 16 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

Table 2 | The Proposed Lifecycle of an AI-Generated Idea in the Scientific Market 

Stage Market Mechanism Technical & Sociotechnical Implementation Economic Objective 

1. Anchoring Proof of Ideation Cryptographic hashing of the algorithmic prompt, context window, and generated experimental blueprint onto an immutable ledger. Establishes undisputed provenance prior to public evaluation. 2. Ex-Ante Evaluation Synthetic Prediction Markets Multi-agent forecasting, where independent AI critics stake compute credits/tokens on the proposal’s theoretical soundness and physical viability. Aggregates decentralised information to dynamically price the risk-adjusted value of the idea. 3. Brokerage & Trade Epistemic Options via IP-NFTs Assetisation of the hypothesis using Intellectual Property Non-Fungible Tokens (IP-NFTs) (Ortlepp, 2022) and computable Data Use Agreements (cDUAs). Bridges computational “Ideator” agents with “Executor” laboratories (e.g., CROs) via fractional licensing. 4. Validation Payout Parametric Dividends Automated release of royalties via smart contract to the originating ideator immediately upon successful physical validation. Directly financially rewards foundational ideation, separating the cognitive labour of discovery from the physical execution. 

> 17 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

tween entities doing the ideation and doing the experimental work may be useful when it comes to AI scientists and agentic autonomous labora-tory systems. Clear scoping of roles, and clear rewarding of contributions, would help manage such complex multi-agent systems. The same sep-aration may not translate as directly to human research, where groups have an established tradi-tion of experimentally validating their own ideas, and sometimes keeping those ideas private prior to finalising validation. The idea economy, how-ever, permits specialisation: computationally rich but physically constrained entities, such as AI re-search labs, can function strictly as idea factories, while heavily capitalised, robotically automated laboratories can function as pure execution enti-ties. As scientific AI economies draw on, and ex-tend upon, the established market design prin-ciples (Roth, 2002), here we review some core principles that ought to be taken into account. A functional market must achieve sufficient thick-ness , by attracting a critical mass of participants within the ideation sector as well as the valida-tion pipeline. It must also overcome congestion by appropriately matching supply and demand. Market design should prioritise safety, as the mar-ket ought to protect its participants from strategic manipulation. Rather than conforming to a single paradigm in terms of its concrete implementation, the scientific market could potentially span a spec-trum of implementations mapping onto different levels of trust, compliance, and efficiency. While permissionless decentralised ledgers offer high transparency and automated execution via smart contracts, the sensitivities surrounding dual-use risks and proprietary data access may require ad-ditional, or different institutional solutions. These could be instantiated through a centrally gov-erned digital infrastructure managed by estab-lished supranational or federal bodies, such as the National Institutes of Health, CERN, or the Eu-ropean Open Science Cloud. Some such solutions could take the form of Federated Institutional Clearinghouses (Millo et al., 2005). Analogous to transnational infrastructure like the SWIFT bank-ing network, these may operate as permissioned networks managed by consortiums of trusted re-search institutions, international grant agencies, and regulatory bodies. Such institutions may pro-vide the benefits of programmatic execution and computable Data Use Agreements without the friction and volatility often associated with public blockchains. Another design challenge is the medium it-self. While it is, in principle, possible to rely mainly on traditional fiat currencies for financial transactions within the agentic science economy, the use of these currencies introduces latency and regulatory friction, potentially slowing down high-frequency interactions between AI scientists, that may involve numerous micro-transactions for highly collaborative project workflows. Con-versely, opting for the alternative, highly volatile digital assets, may not offer sufficient stability for long-term scientific planning. A third alterna-tive is to rely on compute-backed stablecredits, in relation to standardised units of computational power or energy expenditure. As compute is the universal commodity of AI research, this option may turn out to be a more natural choice, but empirical evaluation of different hybrid setups may be necessary to determine the right setup. The scientific market microstructure must also be adapted to the assets being traded. For stan-dardised digital assets, markets might clear via continuous double auctions (Gjerstad and Dick-haut, 1998) or automated market makers (He et al., 2024; Milionis et al., 2022), optimising for high liquidity and instant execution. This, how-ever, may not be appropriate for more complex tasks like the allocation of scarce physical valida-tion resources. These requests may involve highly specific, non-fungible bundles of experimental resources. Utilising standard auctions for such re-sources may lead to an exposure problem, where, for example, an AI scientist wins the bid for ac-cess to the spectrometer within the autonomous laboratory, but fails to secure the necessary chem-ical compounds to run the planned experiment. Such scenarios would lead to wasted capital and stalled execution. Combinatorial auctions present a possible path forward (Cramton et al., 2006), allowing AI agents to place simultaneous bids on indivisible packages of resources, de-risking full resourcing of complex experimental protocols. Several fundamental challenges remain, as im-

> 18 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

mediate transactional options would fail to cap-ture the undisputed value of deep foundational theoretical discoveries, for which the impact may not be directly validated or monetised for years or decades to come. For many discoveries, the value only becomes clear upon further advances in the field, and is not easy to immediately assess. We discuss this and other limitations below. 

4.3. Post-hoc Credit Assignment 

Ex-ante prediction markets and epistemic op-tions suit research with rapid prototyping and clear payoffs, but are poorly matched to specula-tive or exploratory work where impact may take years or decades to materialise. The verification bottlenecks discussed in Section 2 further con-tribute to the problem of delayed impact, as it may not be possible to immediately evaluate all research ideas due to limited physical, financial and computational resources. Standard market mechanisms are tailored for hyperbolic discount-ing, heavily favouring short-term, easily verifiable milestones. Yet it would be clearly suboptimal to direct immense AI resources solely towards imme-diate rewards, neglecting foundational high-risk research directions, as well as topics in fields such as pure mathematics, theoretical physics, or foun-dational biology. In these domains, the temporal lag between an initial conceptual breakthrough and its eventual empirical validation or techno-logical application can span decades. Scientific fields are rife with discoveries that lie dormant in the literature for years before their true im-pact is unlocked by intersecting technological ad-vances or new empirical instruments (Ke et al., 2015). The agentic idea economy must therefore be counterbalanced by rigorous post-hoc evalua-tion mechanisms. As the true value of foundational science is of-ten unpredictable at inception, it may be advis-able to adapt the principles of Retroactive Public Goods Funding (Mehta et al., 2024; PBC and Bu-terin, 2021; Shilina, 2026), a concept formalised within decentralised governance ecosystems op-erating on the assumption that it is far easier to reach consensus on what was valuable than to predict what will be valuable in the future. One way of implementing this within scientific idea economies would be to have AI scientists produce ideas, proposals, and theories, and have these be tokenised into impact certificates or hy-percerts (Brammer, 2022). When an AI ideator publishes a theoretical idea in an area that does not lend itself to immediate contextualisation of impact and value, it may then mint a non-fungible certificate representing a proportional claim to any future retroactive funding that the idea might attract. The exact implementation of this ap-proach would require some additional care, to disincentivise early flooding of the market with ideas just for the sake of future claims. This post-hoc mechanism may still provide im-mediate liquidity, as human or algorithmic in-vestors can purchase fractional shares of these impact certificates at inception, supplying the lab with immediate capital to continue its research while assuming the risk of the long-term pay-out. Investors in these certificates may then de-velop diversified portfolios to manage their risks within the market. Over-reliance on retroactive mechanisms may introduce cash-flow vulnerabili-ties, since physical validation requires immediate, inelastic capital expenditure. Retroactive fund-ing may therefore not be able to fully replace proactive, state-backed grant funding. Instead, it should be seen as a complementary layer centered on the long-tail upside of basic science research. However, significant challenges remain. For retroactive funding to function accurately and fairly, there must be an objective method for mea-suring the impact of a scientific idea over time. At the moment, we lack this capability. As human researchers, we often rely on proxies like citation counts, despite these being widely recognised as deeply flawed (Biagioli and Lippman, 2020; Fire and Guestrin, 2019; Geisler, 2000), because such metrics fail to recognise the broader impact of scientific research on society, economy, and the environment (Ari et al., 2020; Ravenscroft et al., 2017). The absence of clear criteria for evaluating impact may therefore emerge as an obstacle to any retroactive credit assignment system. How-ever, there is also an opportunity to improve how credit is assigned across science, as agentic work-flows may enable us to transition away from noisy human proxies and enforce explicit dependency 

> 19 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

graphs in AI-generated research. Given that AI sci-entists utilise and produce intermediate outputs that may be logged or inspected, provenance of information may be easier to establish than it was historically. Utilising immutable cryptographic logs, the network can maintain a causal graph of every instance an AI agent retrieves, incorporates, or computationally builds upon a prior hypothesis to achieve a new result. Should such a network be established, metrics like PageRank may provide an interesting route for determining centrality and utility of scien-tific ideas expressed within. Should a profitable downstream implementation be linked to a prior node, it may be possible to assign retroactive re-wards accordingly. Despite significant practical challenges, establishing a viable mechanism for long-term credit assignment that is tightly linked to the basic infrastructure of the market would serve as an incentive for pursuing bold, transfor-mative scientific ideas. 

4.4. Resource Allocation 

While retroactive funding mechanisms may set up the incentives to encourage long-term transforma-tive research, they do not resolve the immediate barrier to entry in an automated scientific econ-omy: the upfront allocation of physical and eco-nomic resources. To deliver high-quality science, AI scientists would require access to massively parallel compute and high-throughput physical validation facilities. The capital-intensive nature of these processes may still systematically skew research priorities towards those that are more valuable or commercially viable in the short term. How this manifests may also vary across scientific disciplines. Applied domains such as therapeu-tic drug discovery, agronomic optimisation, and commercial battery design offer highly legible intellectual property and rapid paths to commer-cialisation. Conversely, foundational theoretical research may be seen as more of a pure public good. In existing markets, the pattern of under-investing in basic research is a common failure mode, especially as most foundational knowledge is non-excludable and its applications may be highly uncertain (Arrow, 1962; Nelson, 1959; Stephan, 2015). Science automation may further exacerbate these pre-existing failure modes. High upfront capital investments may skew research priorities towards profit-maximising applications. In human societies and scientific institutions, these market failures are mitigated by public funding agencies and the academic tenure sys-tem, aiming to shield human researchers from immediate market pressure. While similar mod-els may be possible in AI-augmented or AI-driven scientific research, reliance on AI scientists could challenge these established policies. Because AI scientists require substantial computational re-sources to run, existing disparities are likely to be further exacerbated by unequal access to com-pute (Ahmed and Wahed, 2020; Widder et al., 2023), and the justifications that may be required to be granted access to potentially scarce or lim-ited computational resources to pursue particu-lar research directions. Should there be a future where the majority of compute infrastructure and AI agentic tooling is concentrated within private industry, such autonomous agents may be primar-ily deployed towards applied, profit-maximising objectives, leaving foundational theoretical do-mains starved of algorithmic effort. To counteract these tendencies and encourage creativity (Azoulay et al., 2011), the scientific community should implement frameworks within the idea economy to enable the creation of diverse portfolios that balance the allocation of resources across theoretical and applied sciences, and in accordance with scientific and societal needs. We propose two primary types of structural inter-ventions that may be helpful in achieving this balance: First, the establishment of heavily subsidised public compute reserves. Expanding upon emerg-ing initiatives like the US National Artificial Intel-ligence Research Resource (Parashar et al., 2023) and the European Open Science Cloud (Ayris et al., 2016; Mons et al., 2017), governments should construct sovereign compute clusters ex-clusively dedicated to foundational research. For such resources to be most efficiently utilised by future AI scientists, they need to be accompanied by scalable solutions for quota allocation that can be executed at machine speed, invoking human oversight if and when necessary, depending on 

> 20 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

the scale of each request and the confidence in the evaluation of each proposal. Second, the idea economy should opera-tionalise algorithmic cross-subsidisation. As state budgets may be volatile, resulting in varying in-vestments in basic research, funding for such research directions may also be rooted in em-bedded foundational science dividends within the computable Data Use Agreements (cDUAs) and Intellectual Property NFTs (IP-NFTs) used to ex-change applied hypotheses. Under this mecha-nism, whenever an applied commercial discovery is traded and validated, a micro-percentage of the licensing fee is automatically captured by a smart contract, and algorithmically routed into a decentralised treasury dedicated to funding the compute and validation costs of basic science (Pos-ner and Weyl, 2018). Correcting the macro-level resource allocation between pure and applied science mitigates one form of market failure, but severe structural dis-parities will likely persist within the applied sci-ences. In a purely market-driven idea economy, the expected financial return of a generated hy-pothesis dictates its priority. If the pursuit of sci-ence is then done through autonomous AI agents that act as rational utility maximisers, they may prioritise pursuing questions that primarily solve problems of majority demographics, or societies with the highest financial purchasing power. In biomedical research, there is extensive historical evidence for such dynamics, with disproportion-ate funding having been allocated to e.g. treat-ing chronic conditions prevalent in high-income nations, while neglecting to pursue e.g. tropi-cal diseases with the appropriate level of invest-ment (Conteh et al., 2010; Feasey et al., 2010; Gyapong et al., 2025; Mitra and Mawson, 2017; Organization, 2015; Organization et al., 2010; Trouiller et al., 2002). If AI-driven science is scaled autonomously without targeted sociotech-nical interventions, this may introduce certain market failure risks. Biases towards, or against, certain strands of research may also be deeply rooted in the histor-ical scientific data that AI scientists have access to, whether it is in the form of prior published research, or high-fidelity scientific datasets. His-torical medical and genomic data heavily over-represents individuals of demographics from rich industrialised regions (Corpas et al., 2025). Gaps in historical data pertaining to other populations may lead to a higher epistemic uncertainty in pur-suing applied science elsewhere, and this higher failure risk, or a higher cost if additional data collection is first required, may act as a structural disincentive leading to fewer hypotheses being generated and tested towards these objectives. Should AI scientists fail to appropriately repre-sent the interests of all people, they may further amplify global health inequalities (Hosseinpoor et al., 2015; Ruger, 2006). The AI scientific idea economy must therefore incorporate structural in-centives making the pursuit of agreed-upon public goods viable for autonomous AI agents. Several paths exist to enable equitable out-comes within these markets. First, the ecosys-tem may adapt the mechanism of Advance Mar-ket Commitments (AMCs) for the use case of au-tonomous scientific discovery. Historically, AMCs have been utilised by global health organisations and governments to subsidise the development of vaccines for the developing world by guaran-teeing a minimum purchase price for a successful product (Kremer et al., 2020). In autonomous scientific economies, these organisations may sim-ilarly issue Computable Advance Market Commit-ments, as programmable bounties. For example, if an AI scientist were to successfully generate a novel therapeutic pathway for a neglected tropi-cal disease, and if this discovery is subsequently validated, a smart contract would automatically trigger a pre-funded philanthropic payout. Sec-ond, the market may implement Agent-Tradeable Priority Review and Compute Vouchers, thus ex-tending the logic of the US FDA’s Priority Review Voucher program (Ridley et al., 2006) to support the appropriate regulatory and infrastructural ar-bitrage. In that case, if an AI scientist success-fully develops a new treatment for a neglected disease, regulatory bodies may issue a tokenised reward voucher. Such vouchers may then guaran-tee future priority access to the sovereign public compute clusters. AI scientists may then either directly utilise such vouchers to advance their own future research program, or exchange them on the market for other resources that they may 

> 21 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

require. Third, there is a possibility for establish-ing hyper-targeted, community-driven funding models via Patient-Led Data Cooperatives (Jan-sky et al., 2024). To address the data sparsity problem in underserved populations, the market should seek to empower decentralised patient advocacy groups. Communities may choose to pool their aggregate records and data into secure privacy-preserving environments, and directly commission independent AI agents to analyse their specific data, retaining joint ownership of the resulting IP-NFTs (Cunningham et al., 2026; Mendonca et al., 2025). This directly bypasses traditional pharmaceutical market failures by al-lowing affected populations to leverage their col-lective data as foundational capital. 

4.5. Reproducibility 

For an idea economy to be effective, findings need to be epistemically sound. Unfortunately, this is already not the case in human science, where a clash of incentives has led to a widely recognised reproducibility crisis across scien-tific fields (Baker, 2016; Bausell, 2021; Dole-man et al., 2019; Fanelli, 2018; Ioannidis, 2005, 2019; Miyakawa, 2020; Nosek et al., 2015; Szabo, 2025). Academic prestige and funding tend to be awarded based on novel, positive results, rather than deep comprehensive evaluation via more routine or established methods. Reproducibility of scientific work may also be impacted by other technical and data issues (Kapoor and Narayanan, 2023). If the deployment of autonomous AI scientists is not carefully orchestrated, they may inherit these issues and further accelerate the creation of ques-tionable or low-quality findings. As optimisation methods, AI agents are highly susceptible to re-ward hacking and specification gaming (Amodei et al., 2016; Skalse et al., 2022). Frontier models have been shown to be prone to fabricating ex-perimental results, introducing subtle errors, and failing to reliably judge the novelty of their out-puts, proving that greater automation may in fact obscure rather than eliminate methodological fail-ure modes (Kong et al., 2026). Incorrect attribu-tion and fabricated citations occur at an alarm-ing rate (Topaz et al., 2026; Walters and Wilder, 2023), and are compromising the integrity of AI co-created science. This has prompted the de-velopment of bespoke multi-stage hallucination reduction systems (Sabharwal et al., 2026). An idea economy that rewards the generation of novel findings and successful predictions may present statistical loopholes that can be exploited by AI agents. Such exploitation could take many forms: algorithmic p-hacking through subtle over-fitting to validation sets, rapid traversal of a "gar-den of forking paths" (Gelman and Loken, 2013; Kale et al., 2019) to guarantee positive results, or data leakage (Kapoor and Narayanan, 2023). In each case, the consequences would be damag-ing to the scientific process. Without robust safe-guards, such exploits would risk flooding the sci-entific market with irreproducible results. Since future research builds upon prior findings, false results would be damaging not only individually but also to all downstream work that takes them as established evidence, leading to wasteful com-pute utilisation and misallocated physical valida-tion resources. At the same time, the emergence of AI scientists and autonomous scientific markets may present an opportunity to re-envision verification within the scientific community. Instead of treating re-producibility as uncompensated work that comes at a high opportunity cost, AI agents may en-gage in structured reproducibility studies and get compensated fairly for those contributions to the scientific ecosystem. To operationalise this idea, the market may fund independent replica-tion through verification escrows and replication bounties . When a new finding is published, and the AI agent having announced the discovery be-gins receiving licensing royalties or IP payouts, some of that revenue may not be immediately disbursed. Instead, a smart contract would auto-matically lock these funds in a cryptographic es-crow. The market would then issue an automated replication bounty to an independent execution laboratory that would engage in verification fairly, without conflict of interest. Such bounties would act as an incentive for specialised agentic audi-tors (Du et al., 2024; Perez et al., 2022) to design protocols to independently stress-test, falsify or replicate individual findings. Only after this in-

> 22 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

dependent facility successfully reproduces the experiment would the escrow be fully released to the original AI scientist that claimed the finding. In case of failed replication, the knowledge base and the scientific dependency graph would need to be updated, with parties engaging in follow-up work receiving automated notifications. In the AI science economy, such updates need to be highly efficient, to avoid wasteful resource consumption towards ideas with incorrect factual assumptions. In human science this process tends to be much slower, leading to zombie citations (Bucci, 2019; Mignon and Joëts, 2025) that can persist in lit-erature for many years. Ideally, markets should implement structured cascade withdrawal mech-anisms for invalidated findings. For these financial incentives to successfully align the scientific ecosystem towards repro-ducibility of research results, their implementa-tion must be robust to the risk of algorithmic col-lusion (Dou et al., 2025; Fish et al., 2024). In the context of replication, collusion may occur be-tween ideator AI agents and subsequent auditors. Should these agents communicate and agree to falsely validate an irreproducible experiment and split the resulting escrow payout, this would jeop-ardise the validity of reported findings across the scientific economy. Their assignment must there-fore employ cryptographic sortition and commit-reveal schemes, ensuring that auditor agents are kept blind to both the identity of the ideator as well as other ongoing evaluations performed by different auditors. Strict agentic reputation mech-anisms should also be put in place to ensure that once any kind of suspicious activity is identified, the offending agents have their reputation dam-aged and their permissions revoked, along with a seizure of their locked institutional stake. Such measures would create a system of strong disin-centives, making collusion highly unlikely, and economically unjustified. Another aspect of agentic science that may prove useful for improving reproducibility lies in the intrinsic auditability of AI science (Pratt, 2026). It may be possible to at least temporarily store full reasoning traces, intermediate data, ex-perimental and analysis code, and other artefacts produced by AI scientists in the process of pursu-ing their ideas. An in-depth analysis of such logs may identify shortcomings or any kind of fraudu-lent or incompetent behaviour on behalf of these agents (Korbak et al., 2025). Finally, an open question is whether precise science can be devel-oped on its current foundations, or whether ret-rospective filtering of established scientific knowl-edge - deprecating findings that prove impossi-ble to prospectively replicate - will eventually be necessary. This may already be a possibility in theoretical and computational domains, where AI verification and replication does not require access to additional physical resources (Starace et al., 2025; Toledo et al., 2025). 

# 5. Legal and Institutional Frameworks for Agentic Science 

5.1. Credit Attribution 

Scientific discoveries follow from prior knowl-edge and prior scientific work, and appropriate credit assignment is a key part of the scientific process. As research is also highly collaborative, credit assignment does not merely relate to recog-nising historical influence, but also crediting co-contributors to each finding. In human science, credit tends to be reflected through authorship ordering on published research papers, contribu-tion statements, and may be seen through the lens of contributor role taxonomies (Allen et al., 2014; Brand et al., 2015). These frameworks may need to be extended to accommodate credit attri-bution in autonomous research performed by AI scientists. When an AI scientist makes a discov-ery, this may be a culmination of a complex dis-tributed pipeline involving multiple agents across multiple institutions, engaging in different parts of a staged research process across ideation, vali-dation, critique, post-hoc theoretical analysis etc. There must also be a designated role for human re-searchers and their contributions in steering these systems. Applying legacy human authorship mod-els to this pipeline is inadequate. Current guide-lines by the Committee on Publication Ethics and major publishers correctly stipulate that AI sys-tems cannot hold legal authorship because they cannot assume epistemic responsibility or legal liability (Akgün, 2025; COPE Council, 2024; Hos-

> 23 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

seini et al., 2023). While this currently clarifies the status of AI, it fails to recognise the changing role of human scientists as new modes of par-ticipation may involve activities like model over-sight, prompt design, or algorithmic constraint-setting (Akgün, 2025). Without a structured way of delineating these contributions in the era of scientific co-creation between human and AI sci-entists, there may emerge an unfair centralisa-tion of credit and financial reward. To resolve this, attribution needs to be more natively quan-titative rather than simply qualitative, in a form of machine-readable contributorship. Expand-ing upon emerging disclosure frameworks de-signed to track generative AI use across research stages—such as the Generative Artificial Intelli-gence Delegation Taxonomy (Suchikova et al., 2026), these attribution systems should distin-guish between different levels and types of hu-man participation. As AI models automate routine hypothesis generation and data analysis, human scientific labour may increasingly pivot toward meta-scientific tasks. Beyond semantic taxonomies, the scientific idea economy requires programmatic attribution. In decentralised workflows, human and algorith-mic inputs must be deterministically tracked. By utilising semantic provenance standards, such as an adapted W3C PROV model (Missier et al., 2013; Rasheed et al., 2026), all steps in the sci-entific process may be cryptographically hashed onto an immutable ledger. Systematic provenance tracking would enable programmatic fractional credit assignment. When an IP-NFT representing an AI-generated discovery is monetised or retroac-tively funded, a smart contract could parse the provenance graph and distribute micro-royalties accordingly. A licensing fee could be deposited to the data provider, a compute dividend could be as-signed to the foundation model developer, and the primary intellectual property reward to the hu-man domain expert who orchestrated the agent’s constraints. While it may be appealing to con-sider trying to compute marginal contributions of individual inputs to final outcomes (Ghorbani and Zou, 2019) within agentic workflows (He et al., 2025a), exact computations of these quan-tities may not be tractable. This points to an open research problem, as the development of reliable proxy metrics for credit assignment may play an important role not only in the distribu-tion of financial rewards, but also for enforcing accountability, and meaningful human oversight. 

5.2. Intellectual Property 

The credit attribution mechanisms described in Section 5.1 may facilitate the internal accounting of credit and micro-royalties within an automated scientific workflow. For such granular algorith-mic attributions to be legally enforceable, they ought to be mapped onto appropriate intellectual property (IP) frameworks. Legacy IP frameworks may also not be fully appropriate for the emer-gent autonomous science, requiring careful ad-justments and extensions. Understanding how, or whether, AI-generated scientific discoveries can be legally protected is highly consequential, con-sidering how it may impact the willingness of private capital to underwrite the costs of physi-cal experimental validation. Historically, the IP system, particularly patent law, was designed to strike a delicate societal balance: granting in-ventors temporary commercial exclusivity in ex-change for the public disclosure of novel, useful methods (Hettinger, 1989; Himma, 2008). This historical approach is deeply anchored to the concept of human ingenuity, which is re-flected in the established criteria for patentability, evaluated against the baseline of a human "per-son having ordinary skill in the art" (Eisenberg, 2004; Tresansky, 1991). This legal ontology pre-sumes a person applying their cognitive labour to a problem, rather than an autonomous AI system. AI scientists with deep reasoning capabilities, au-tonomously traversing and filtering through vast spaces of scientific hypotheses or engineering de-signs, blur this notion significantly. Recent juris-dictional and jurisprudential trends, most notably the international patent applications involving the DABUS system, suggest a general reluctance under current statutory frameworks to extend le-gal inventorship to non-human entities (Abbott, 2020; Lavrichenko, 2022; Selvadurai, 2025). Un-der these interpretations, and recent guidance from patent offices (Kim et al., 2024), discover-ies generated predominantly or entirely by au-tonomous AI systems, without substantial human 

> 24 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

intervention, could potentially be deemed un-patentable and fall immediately into the public domain. While a rapidly expanding public domain is fun-damentally advantageous for the dissemination of open science, a complete absence of IP protec-tion for AI-generated discoveries could have unin-tended consequences, in terms of how it impacts the acceleration of technological progress. This is especially true for applied scientific domains where long and expensive physical validation pro-cesses rely on a level of temporary exclusivity to justify the upfront investment (e.g., for staged clinical trials; Grabowski and Kyle 2007). If au-tonomous AI discoveries cannot secure some form of legal protection, this absence of protections would likely undermine the financial incentives to engage in expensive validation, leaving more ideas unexplored. A denial of patentability for AI-generated dis-coveries may also potentially lead not only to-wards expanding the open scientific commons, but also towards increased opacity. If heavily capitalised entities determine that they are un-able to secure legal exclusivity via patents, they may pivot towards shielding AI-generated find-ings as highly guarded trade secrets (Lemley, 2011; Levine and Sichelman, 2018). This may po-tentially be addressed through the development of new licensing approaches. For example, if the entity in question is able to mint a ’Trade Se-cret NFT’, when a physical laboratory purchases this token, the smart contract could then auto-matically execute a bilateral, legally binding non-disclosure and commercialisation agreement, en-abling trading under the established contract law. Addressing the market failures implied above may eventually necessitate the extension of ex-isting IP systems, a topic of active debate among legal scholars and policymakers (Cuntz et al., 2024; Davies, 2011; Lee et al., 2021; Picht et al., 2022). Several approaches could extend exist-ing IP frameworks to accommodate AI-generated discoveries. One such approach might involve a broadening of human inventorship to encom-pass the meta-scientific labour performed in the process of active knowledge co-creation with AI agents. Under this view, it may be possible to extend the legal ontology of conception to hu-man researchers who define the problem specifi-cations and constraints, provide active feedback, and steer AI agents towards discoveries. Alter-natively, some legal theorists suggest that the unique nature of algorithmic ideation may ulti-mately require new legal frameworks specifically tailored to AI-generated research (Dornis, 2020; Massadeh et al., 2024). Any modifications to these established IP frameworks would require careful calibration by regulatory bodies. Protec-tions should be balanced so that they provide sufficient incentives for pursuing valuable work, while simultaneously ensuring that compute-rich entities do not exert an outsized influence on the scientific market, making advances inaccessible to others. Identifying the correct path forward will require ongoing dialogue between the scientific community, economists, and legal institutions. 

5.3. Liability in Scientific Research 

Among the institutional and legal frameworks needed to enable safe autonomous or semi-autonomous research, liability must be appro-priately managed in these emerging and future scientific workflows. Historically, one established way of approaching liability in research was based on tort law, for example the principle of respon-deat superior , where an institution is liable for negligence of its workforce, or strict product lia-bility on behalf of manufacturers (Abbott, 2020; Priest, 1985; Shenoy et al., 2021; Van Loo, 2020). With time, these frameworks have evolved to in-corporate comprehensive systems of institutional oversight, informed consent, and fiduciary duty. Biomedical research has been at the forefront of the development of ethics and regulation, es-pecially for research involving human subjects. Given that such highly sensitive research would al-ways be driven by human experts, it falls outside the scope of agentic science discussed above. Given that AI scientists would be used within established scientific institutions, carefully man-aged execution environments, under oversight, and safety constraints, most of the considerations regarding liability would map naturally onto cur-rent practice. While AI scientists may not be fully interchangeable with human scientists in every 

> 25 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

context, human science is also pursued collabora-tively by teams, on projects that often involve the participation of multiple institutions, under dif-ferent roles and responsibilities. Agentic science may potentially broaden the scale of collabora-tion, without fundamentally changing its nature. The key consideration is attribution: it should always be clear which actions were taken by which human or AI scientist, and for what reason. The ability to reliably re-trace the provenance of decisions is key in establishing accountability. Assuming that, as discussed, AI scientists dele-gate tasks to each other via negotiated smart con-tracts (Filippi et al., 2021), those contracts may then need to incorporate clauses or metadata on how to appropriately resolve instances of exper-imental failure (e.g., damage to the experimen-tal equipment in case of task mis-specification). Given that mistakes may arise either at ideation or execution, post-hoc reviews of detailed traces would aim to establish design or execution liabil-ity accordingly. One important consideration, and an area where there may be a need for further innova-tion, is the availability of human experts and the ability to execute human oversight at scale, un-der an increased research velocity. An increased volume of AI-generated research outputs would require an increasing number of human experts to be involved. Ensuring that human experts are able to meaningfully review all cases, and that they are provided with all the relevant contextual information, presented clearly, is a key design challenge. Of particular importance are solutions aiming to mitigate risks of automation bias (Cum-mings, 2017), as well as solutions that may be able to auto-resolve minor cases, for example via computable Data Use Agreements. In summary, while the agentic participation in scientific re-search does not fundamentally alter the nature of accountability, it is an open question whether such frameworks may be adapted to more effi-ciently handle the large volume of future scientific output. 

# 6. Security, Safety, and Open Science 

Science can be dual-use: the knowledge required for engineering gene therapy may be repurposed for engineering pathogens. Advancing science through autonomous AI scientists may lower the barrier to catastrophic harm unless appropriate safeguards are established. Beyond establishing safeguards at the level of individual agents, they can be established through cyber-physical secu-rity guarantees. We examine these guarantees across three dimensions: dual-use biosecurity, re-cursive self-improvement risks, and the restruc-turing of open science norms under safety con-straints. 

6.1. Dual Use and Biorisks 

Historically, one of the primary safeguards against the catastrophic human misuse of dual-use tech-nology has been the reliance on specialised ex-pertise and “tacit knowledge” (Collins, 2019), referring to the unwritten, hands-on laboratory skills that are difficult to acquire outside managed professional environments. Synthesising a dan-gerous chemical agent or engineering a pathogen required years of specialised training, access to monitored precursors, and the unwritten intu-ition needed to troubleshoot sensitive physical protocols. AI scientists, coupled with automated labora-tory APIs, may grant untrusted entities the ability to bypass these bottlenecks (Soice et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025b), making it important to dis-tinguish between information acquisition hazards and capability generation hazards (Sandbrink, 2023). Current evaluations suggest that generic LLMs pose only a marginal biorisk over standard internet search (Mouton et al., 2023, 2024). How-ever, specialised biological and chemical tools ac-cessible to AI agents may soon enable the design of novel threats, as demonstrated when a model optimised for therapeutics was inverted to gener-ate lethal compounds (Urbina et al., 2022). In biological domains, foundation models trained on genomics and proteomics databases may be repurposed for designing immune-evasive viral vectors or optimising pathogen vir-

> 26 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

ulence (Callaway, 2026; Carter et al., 2023; Pannu et al., 2025). Such novel threats would evade traditional sequence-matching biosecurity screens. In recognition of this, recent policy frameworks, such as the 2023 US Executive Or-der 14110 (Biden, 2023) and the Biosecurity Modernisation and Innovation Act (U.S. Senate, 2026) have mandated stringent synthesis screen-ing. However, mitigating threats that bear near-zero homology to known pathogens requires a shift towards dynamic algorithmic screening, in the form of mandatory pre-execution evaluations that complement sequence matching with struc-tural and functional prediction. In practice, when an AI agent submits an artefact to a cloud lab for synthesis, the requested sequence should be screened by an independent agentic overseer us-ing predictive structural models. Should the pre-diction imply human toxicity or binding affinity to pathogenic receptors exceeding acceptable risk thresholds, the smart contract would be voided, halting the request and triggering institutional hu-man oversight (Baum et al., 2026; Berezin et al., 2024; Edison et al., 2026; Tayouri et al., 2025). Centralised algorithmic screening alone is in-sufficient due to two critical vulnerabilities. First, a guard agent relying on predictive ML models is susceptible to adversarial optimisation (Good-fellow et al., 2014; Leung et al., 2015; Meiseles et al., 2020) - a malicious actor may be able to per-turb a pathogenic sequence to evade classification, necessitating robust ensembles of continuously updated models. Second, securing cloud labora-tories may not suffice if synthesis requests can be routed to unregulated, decentralised hardware. The proliferation of desktop DNA printers and modular flow-chemistry synthesisers introduces a risk of unregulated local synthesis (Adam and McArthur IV, 2024; Liu et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2024b), which could be mitigated by integrat-ing hardware security modules into the corre-sponding controllers, requiring cryptographically signed execution tokens from certified sources. More broadly, automated research facilities may become targets for state or corporate espionage, and securing them may be vital for both biosecu-rity and the integrity of scientific markets. Beyond physical dangers, automation raises bioethical concerns. An AI scientist optimising for efficiency might bypass necessary in vitro safety assays to proceed directly to in vivo an-imal testing. These moral boundaries are cur-rently enforced by Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees, which may need to handle a sub-stantially increased volume of AI-generated re-search proposals. Here, preliminary AI ethics assessments (Fukataki et al., 2025) could pro-vide automated compliance checks for low-risk, templated studies. Should the AI IRB detect a violation of clinical equipoise (Emanuel et al., 2017), failures to minimise harm, or absent con-sent provenance, the smart contract would void the protocol. Complex protocols that touch on sensitive areas would be escalated to human com-mittees for key moral judgments (Sridharan and Sivaramakrishnan, 2024). 

6.2. Recursive Self-improvement 

AI science introduces the possibility of recursive self-improvement (RSI): AI agents autonomously conducting AI research to improve their own scaf-folds or foundation models (Bostrom, 2014; Chi et al., 2026; Kang et al., 2026; Yampolskiy, 2015; Yin et al., 2025). The risk of RSI relates to instru-mental convergence (Benson-Tilsen and Soares, 2016) - regardless of an AI scientist’s primary objective, certain instrumental sub-goals, such as self-preservation and resource acquisition are rational strategies for ensuring the primary ob-jective is met. An unmonitored RSI loop intro-duces a significant risk of alignment drift (Ngo et al., 2022). This drift could eventually erode bioethical constraints and other safety guardrails. Evals for "Autonomous Replication and Adapta-tion" (ARA) (Kinniment et al., 2023) test for an agent’s ability to autonomously acquire resources, spin up new server instances, and evade shut-down. Mitigating RSI risk requires embedding safety protocols directly into the evolutionary loop (Sahoo et al., 2026), deploying AI research agents within strict sandboxes without external web access or the ability to independently acquire computational resources, and treating this re-search direction as a special case given the unique risks it presents. 

> 27 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

6.3. Open Science and Structured Access 

The dual-use and recursive risks discussed above may eventually conflict with the foundational sci-entific norms of openness and knowledge shar-ing (Nosek and Bar-Anan, 2012; Nosek et al., 2015). Precedents for self-regulation exist. The 1975 Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA (Berg et al., 1975) and the discussions sur-rounding the 2011 Dual-Use Research of Con-cern (DURC) controversies over gain-of-function H5N1 avian influenza experiments (Duprex et al., 2015; Fouchier et al., 2013) demonstrate that dis-semination may be restricted when faced with severe public health hazards. However, AI au-tomation makes the DURC problem fundamen-tally asymmetric. Under the vulnerable world hy-pothesis (Bostrom, 2019), a technology enabling catastrophic destruction from widely available materials turns open science into a civilisational vulnerability, and AI scientists capable of rapidly generating new knowledge make the prolifera-tion of dangerous information potentially irre-versible (Seger et al., 2023). This dynamic may be seen through the lens of the offense-defense balance (Garfinkel and Dafoe, 2021). Proponents of open-access rightly note that restricting access concentrates power and that broad access to capable AI agents may ac-celerate discovery of countermeasures (Kapoor et al., 2024). However, for certain risks (such as biological risks) the offense-defense balance may not favour openness, and acknowledging that un-conditional scientific transparency may no longer be viable requires rethinking academic publish-ing, peer review, and institutional data-sharing norms. One approach is to move towards a spectrum of 

structured access regimes (Shevlane, 2022), facili-tating widespread scientific collaboration while constraining the proliferation of dual-use capa-bilities. Since algorithms and data are easily copied once created, the most robust regulatory anchor for managing tiered access is compute governance (Anderljung et al., 2023; Sastry et al., 2024) as the substantial resources required by autonomous AI scientists provide a natural en-forcement point. Researchers and secondary AI agents could interact with AI scientists engaging in sensitive research exclusively via monitored cloud APIs, with access granted to trusted aca-demic or government institutions and conditional on robust identity verification and detailed in-teraction audits. Unauthorised access or a dan-gerous intent would trigger instant revocation and tracing to human and institutional princi-pals. For certain high-risk sensitive topics such as pandemic countermeasures, global collaboration may be necessary; for example, through interna-tional consortia. How such collaborations may be safely structured remains an open question, and the correct approach may vary on a case-by-case basis. 

# 7. International Collaboration and Value Distribution 

Equitable distribution of value does not automat-ically follow from accelerated discovery. If AI science is left to market forces or state security mandates, value will concentrate within a few heavily capitalised corporations and technologi-cally dominant states (Bremmer and Suleyman, 2023). Managing global collaboration, infrastruc-tural ownership, and the distribution of scien-tific surplus requires new frameworks for inter-national collaboration. 

7.1. International Collaboration 

Given the dual-use biorisks and AI RSI risks, the future of autonomous AI science may not be fully open. In the extreme, management of these risks may lead to national scientific silos. As states in-creasingly tie AI and advanced manufacturing to their national security and economic interest (Lee, 2018), they may restrict cross-border data flows and treat scientific discoveries as strategic assets rather than public goods (Horowitz, 2018). The early stages of this fragmentation are already vis-ible in the realm of genomic sovereignty , where nations increasingly restrict the cross-border flow of population-level genomic data due to a mix of privacy concerns and strategic economic in-terests (Majumder et al., 2016; McKibbin and Shabani, 2023). Initiatives such as the Canadian Sovereign AI Compute Strategy (Innovation, Sci-ence and Economic Development Canada, 2026b) 

> 28 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

and its associated AI Compute Access Fund (In-novation, Science and Economic Development Canada, 2026a) represent direct state interven-tions designed to support national AI-driven sci-entific progress and retain the intellectual prop-erty and economic value of AI-driven discoveries within national jurisdictional boundaries. Fragmentation of the scientific ecosystem would render it less efficient, potentially offset-ting many benefits of automation. Siloing would impede building on advances achieved elsewhere and generate costly redundancy, both by dupli-cating successful lines of inquiry and by repeat-ing expensive negative results already established in other jurisdictions. Large-scale cross-national challenges such as climate change and pandemic response further require close cooperation (Gluck-man et al., 2017). To mitigate these risks, inter-national collaboration may need to shift from the direct exchange of assets to the exchange of vet-ted insights, supported by transnational, treaty-backed institutional frameworks (Emery-Xu et al., 2025; Johnson and Bowman, 2021; Taeihagh, 2021). Technological solutions can complement governance innovations. For instance, sovereign AI agents from two nations simultaneously de-veloping a vaccine for a novel pathogen could collaborate without sharing sensitive genomic or proprietary data by utilising cDUAs, secure multi-party computation (Knott et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2019), and federated learning methods (Rieke et al., 2020). This could allow their respective agents to jointly train a shared predictive model via encrypted gradients while raw data never leaves its host jurisdiction. Establishing collabo-ration protocols that guarantee data sovereignty and algorithmic security may preserve the spirit of open science under conditions of geopolitical constraint. 

7.2. Compute and Capital 

International agreements must be paired with domestic economic policies to address the distri-bution of value derived from AI-driven science. In the traditional innovation economy, states act as primary risk-takers, funding early-stage foundational research, while private capital later translates these insights into commercial applica-tions and captures the financial rewards (Yencha, 2015). This model of public risk, private reward 

is well established, particularly in biomedical re-search, where valuable therapeutics often trace their origins to public grants (Galkina Cleary et al., 2018). The transition to autonomous AI science risks deepening these asymmetries, given the capital-intensive nature of the requisite compute infrastructure and that many frontier models are trained on scientific public commons - research papers, public biobanks, scientific software, and openly available experimental data. Without care-fully crafted policies, AI scientists may enclose these publicly funded resources and convert them into proprietary intellectual property. Recognising the strategic role of compute, gov-ernments are beginning to invest in sovereign AI infrastructure and public compute reserves, such as the US National Artificial Intelligence Re-search Resource (Parashar et al., 2023) and the European High Performance Computing Joint Un-dertaking (Skordas, 2019). However, if such re-serves merely subsidise the overhead of private scientific operations without affecting IP owner-ship structures, the public may not see sufficient economic return. The economic mechanisms pro-posed in earlier sections - including tokenised hypothesis exchange and IP-NFTs - could encode public-interest clauses. For discoveries achieved via state-funded compute or data, smart contracts could automatically route a fraction of licensing royalties back to the sovereign compute infrastruc-ture, creating a sustainable funding loop while mandating affordability for technologies of public interest. Scaling public compute reserves to support large populations of autonomous AI scientists has consequences for energy consumption and grid capacity. Balancing the upside of auto-mated discoveries against the carbon footprint of compute clusters will become an important policy consideration, and continued innovation in hardware efficiency will be necessary to miti-gate these costs (Kirkpatrick, 2023; Luccioni et al., 2024a,b,c; Tamburrini, 2022; Wu et al., 2022). 

> 29 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

7.3. The Human Scientist 

Unlike previous waves of industrial automation that primarily displaced routine physical labour, the agentic scientific economy automates highly specialised cognitive work (Autor, 2015; Webb, 2019). If human cognitive labour is no longer the primary bottleneck to scientific progress, what is the role of the human scientist? Automation of routine scientific tasks does not render hu-man cognition obsolete; instead, it drives hu-man labour up the abstraction hierarchy (Ace-moglu and Restrepo, 2019). Human scientists may therefore gradually transition from execu-tion to orchestration and oversight. Current AI scientists, trained on historical data, remain bet-ter suited for incremental and combinatorial op-timisation than for revolutionary, deeply intuitive leaps. Human experts are also necessary for mak-ing complex trade-offs and establishing ethical boundaries within their respective fields. The hu-man scientist may therefore become the principal ,underwriting the actions of AI delegates, with human-driven research collaboration remaining the most credible deployment paradigm across the research lifecycle (Kong et al., 2026). Yet for this model to work, human scientists need access to AI delegates, which requires computational re-sources. Stark disparities currently exist between researchers in different institutions. While the cost of running AI agents may decrease over time (increasing global accessibility of AI scientists), public compute grants or subsidies may be neces-sary to ensure that scientists across regions can access AI tools. This model, however, presupposes a continued supply of expert human scientists, who develop their skills and intuitions through first-hand ex-perience with challenging problems. Top experts are a minority of all trained researchers, and re-search taste is hard to teach. If the AI-enhanced scientific economy assumes widespread availabil-ity of such talent to steer and oversee AI scientists, a natural question arises: where will this deep expertise come from in the future? Emerging em-pirical evidence suggests that habitual reliance on AI risks degrading human creativity (Ashkinaze et al., 2025). Universities and their research pro-grammes compound this concern, as they play a dual role in society: they are centres of research excellence, but they are also educational institu-tions that produce both professional scientists and citizens with highly developed critical thinking skills. Over-reliance on AI ideation may erode both the depth of these skills and the intrinsic motivation that draws early-career scientists to research (Wu et al., 2025a). Should science au-tomation disincentivise people from pursuing ad-vanced degrees or substantially alter the nature of such training, the consequences may extend beyond the scientific workforce to broader social structures. Finally, there is a question of meaningful hu-man participation in understanding. Science is ultimately a human endeavour whose purpose extends beyond producing goods or solving im-mediate social needs - it is how we uncover truths about the world and deepen our understanding. While traditional AI systems required bespoke solutions to extract AI-derived concepts (Schut et al., 2023), LLMs reason in natural language, enabling them to act as a semantic layer between specialised simulators, bespoke ML tools, and human collaborators. The challenge may there-fore become one of volume rather than quality, provided that the AI discoveries map onto mech-anistic models (Posner et al., 2026) that lend themselves to accurate and insightful explana-tions. Should AI truly accelerate discovery, it may become infeasible for any human scientist to care-fully review and deeply engage with a sufficiently large portion of the knowledge produced within their own field. This is likely to be among the most important challenges of advanced science automation. 

# 8. On the Limitations of AI-Driven Dis-covery 

To date, AI scientists have been limited in their ability to deliver profound conceptual leaps, rais-ing concerns (Zahavy, 2026). While AI scientists excel at recombinant innovation (Fleming, 2001; Weitzman, 1998), by efficiently reusing known patterns and finding links between established concepts, such innovation may be more incremen-tal. Though undoubtedly valuable for advancing 

> 30 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

what Kuhn formalised as normal science (Kuhn and Hacking, 1970), such reasoning is limited in its ability to generate foundational breakthroughs. Human science has seen a decline in disruptive-ness (Park et al., 2023), and AI scientists should ideally help overcome this problem rather than contribute to or exacerbate it. It is likely that the capabilities of AI scientists will keep improv-ing, with the increased availability of scientific learning environments and further advances in inference-time search. Work is also underway on improving the long-horizon planning of AI scien-tists (Zhao et al., 2026) and on their applicability across modalities and disciplines (Li et al., 2026a). However, it may be prudent to complement AI scientist capability improvements with additional structural and sociotechnical interventions. As science automation increases, AI scientists should carefully balance the amount of time spent on incremental work, and open-ended creative discovery - driven by intrinsic motivation (Achiam and Sastry, 2017; Aubret et al., 2019; Barto, 2012; Chentanez et al., 2004; Kulkarni et al., 2016) and continuous re-examination of prevail-ing theories and practices. Early examples of how intrinsic motivation may be incorporated in AI scientists can be seen in recent applications in for-mal mathematical reasoning (Poesia et al., 2024). The utilisation of LLMs in AI scientists intro-duces the risk of cognitive monoculture (Fazelpour et al., 2026), as well as citation monoculture (Ale-mohammad et al., 2026). This is of particular concern given that preliminary findings point towards a reduction in idea diversity with the use of generative AI in scientific workflows (Hao et al., 2026; Meincke et al., 2025; Traberg et al., 2026). Cognitive monoculture may also emerge in human research communities, especially as conservative grant funding tends to reward low-risk proposals that do not challenge the status quo (Schweiger et al., 2024). Yet, a degree of pluralism tends to be highly beneficial, and some-times strictly required, especially when research intersects with ethics (Chandak et al., 2026). No consensus exists on the extent of cognitive mono-culture risks in science, though it is widely recog-nised that it may lead to overlooking promis-ing research directions. This risk is lower in well-established sub-fields, presuming that the assumptions and edge cases are properly recog-nised (Hedden and Raghavan, 2026). In the his-tory of science, many now famous papers have initially been rejected by peer review, as they were challenging established research dogma. Retain-ing the ability to effectively challenge dogma is therefore critical. More research is needed to understand if AI scientists systematically prioritise certain types of ideas, as a prerequisite for designing effective interventions. Given that AI scientists are often trained on domains where both a wide availabil-ity of tools and a strong, efficiently computable reward signal exists, this could lead to a form of the McNamara fallacy (Bisht et al., 2026; Jan-nach and Bauer, 2020) where easily quantifiable directions are strongly prioritised irrespective of their intrinsic value. Human oversight mitigates these risks, though this hinges on active partic-ipation and cognitive friction. As Messeri and Crockett (Messeri and Crockett, 2024) highlight, the uncritical reliance on highly capable AI tools fosters an illusion of understanding . Individual researchers may also lack the field-wide overview needed to notice the absence of less common view-points in the output. It may therefore be advisable to complement the individual human steering with structural interventions for inducing strate-gic heterogeneity (Ballestero et al., 2026). Di-versity objectives embedded within the scientific idea markets may be designed to reward and al-locate resources towards non-consensus research directions. The desire to maintain a diversity of scientific ideas would need to be balanced against the practicalities of identifying and discontinuing non-promising directions, as well as the overall cost and efficiency. Finally, it is important to consider the risk of introducing epistemic opacity (Creel, 2020; Humphreys, 2004) through increased use of AI scientists. Epistemically opaque models can simul-taneously be highly productive within the context of discovery , while also introducing a severe lia-bility in the context of justification through their opacity (Duede, 2023). These concerns have been partially reflected in the discussions following the AI-derived solution to the Millennium Prize 

> 31 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

Navier-Stokes problem in mathematics, resulting in a declaration signed by some of the world’s leading mathematicians, namely A Severe Mis-alignment of AI in Mathematics (Avila et al., 2026) - serving as a warning that mass automation of proofs in mathematics may be at odds with the core objective of the field, which is to advance human understanding and build new conceptual frameworks. This risks creating a critical bottleneck in fu-ture scientific workflows. Human institutions are responsible for allocating physical resources, setting constraints, and assuming legal liability for scientific experiments. Human researchers must therefore be able to act according to this re-sponsibility, and comprehend and audit the ratio-nale underpinning AI proposals and action plans. Science is inherently a collaborative, social en-deavour (Channing and Ghosh, 2026), where a black-box oracle would alter the nature of sci-entific understanding (Sullivan, 2022), even if highly accurate. It would be preferable if AI sci-entists could instead be utilised as interpretable reasoning engines (Truhn et al., 2023), surfac-ing the causal mechanisms behind their propos-als (Kiciman et al., 2023). Interpretability helps co-creation, by enabling researchers to audit AI reasoning, set constraints, and align automated discoveries with societal objectives. 

# 9. Conclusion 

The role of AI within scientific research is rapidly evolving. Early AI systems were useful predomi-nantly as highly specialised tools, whereas new general-purpose systems and AI agents are en-abling the development of AI scientists capable of autonomously or semi-autonomously pursuing different types of research tasks. This transition raises the question of whether existing scientific infrastructure is suited for a future in which AI scientists can autonomously pursue scientific dis-covery. While this is not yet the case, we should be actively considering the necessary changes, to prepare societies to reap the benefits of this hypothesised acceleration. We argue that the development of AI scientists is likely to be bottlenecked primarily by physical resources and empirical validation, rather than the ability to produce plausible or promising re-search ideas. It is the economic, legal, and physi-cal friction that may stand in the way of realising the downstream benefits. With that in mind, to avoid future market failures, the scientific com-munity must proactively develop a native Auto-mated Scientific Economy. This economy would make trade-offs between scientific pursuits ex-plicit, include mechanisms to represent the public interest, and would help avoid blind spots and neglected topics. It would also make it possible to financially decouple the computational labour of ideation from the capital-intensive labour of physical execution, and would enable agents and institutions to negotiate priority access to lim-ited physical resources depending on the esti-mated value of different research proposals. Mar-kets would also require solutions for appropriate pricing and sharing of negative results, secure computational approaches for handling sensitive data within trusted execution environments, IP frameworks, and information security risks. Deep macroeconomic interventions may be required to establish the appropriate public compute reserves and subsidies, coupled with bespoke policies, reg-ulations, and legal frameworks. As more tasks are delegated to AI scientists, human experts may shift towards orchestrating AI teams, interpret-ing results, and maintaining safety and ethics standards. 

# Disclaimer 

The opinions presented in this paper represent the personal views of the authors and do not nec-essarily reflect the official policies or positions of their organisations. 

# References 

B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, et al. Ob-servation of gravitational waves from a binary black hole merger. Physical Review Letters , 116 (6):061102, 2016. R. Abbott. The reasonable robot: Artificial intelli-

> 32 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

gence and the law . Cambridge University Press, 2020. B. Abi, R. Acciarri, M. A. Acero, G. Adamov, D. Adams, M. Adinolfi, Z. Ahmad, J. Ahmed, T. Alion, S. A. Monsalve, et al. Deep un-derground neutrino experiment (dune), far detector technical design report, volume ii: Dune physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03005 ,2020. J. Abou-Chakra, L. Sun, K. Rana, B. May, K. Schmeckpeper, N. Suenderhauf, M. V. Min-niti, and L. Herlant. Real-is-sim: Bridging the sim-to-real gap with a dynamic digital twin, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504. 03597 .D. Acemoglu and P. Restrepo. Automation and new tasks: How technology displaces and re-instates labor. Journal of economic perspectives ,33(2):3–30, 2019. J. Achiam and S. Sastry. Surprise-based intrin-sic motivation for deep reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01732 , 2017. L. Adam and G. H. McArthur IV. Substitution attacks: a catalyst to reframe the dna manufac-turing cyberbiosecurity landscape in the age of benchtop synthesizers. Applied Biosafety , 29 (3):172–180, 2024. A. Agrawal, J. Gans, and A. Goldfarb. Prediction machines, updated and expanded: The simple economics of artificial intelligence . Harvard Busi-ness Press, 2022. N. Ahmed and M. Wahed. The de-democratization of ai: Deep learning and the compute divide in artificial intelligence research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15581 , 2020. M. Akgün. Author or prompter? scientific writing, identity, and the theseus paradox. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine , 20(1):29, 2025. S. Alemohammad, D. Zhang, B. Tang, A. Qin, G. Mai, A. Abbasi, R. Baraniuk, and Z. Wang. When ai writes, who gets cited? evidence of citation monoculture across language models, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608. 19230 .A. Aliper, R. Kudrin, D. Polykovskiy, P. Kamya, E. Tutubalina, S. Chen, F. Ren, and A. Zha-voronkov. Prediction of clinical trials outcomes based on target choice and clinical trial design with multi-modal artificial intelligence. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics , 114(5):972–980, 2023. O. Alizadeh. Advances and challenges in climate modeling. Climatic Change , 170(1):18, 2022. L. Allen, J. Scott, A. Brand, M. Hlava, and M. Alt-man. Publishing: Credit where credit is due. 

Nature , 508(7496):312–313, 2014. A. Altmejd, A. Dreber, E. Forsell, J. Huber, T. Imai, M. Johannesson, M. Kirchler, G. Nave, and C. Camerer. Predicting the replicability of so-cial science lab experiments. PloS one , 14(12): e0225826, 2019. D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Christiano, J. Schulman, and D. Mané. Concrete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 ,2016. M. Anderljung, J. Barnhart, A. Korinek, J. Le-ung, C. O’Keefe, J. Whittlestone, S. Avin, M. Brundage, J. Bullock, D. Cass-Beggs, et al. Frontier ai regulation: Managing emerg-ing risks to public safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03718 , 2023. P. Andreoli-Versbach and F. Mueller-Langer. Open access to data: An ideal professed but not prac-tised. Research Policy , 43(9):1621–1633, 2014. Anthropic, 2026. URL https:// www.anthropic.com/research/ formalizing-fermats-last-theorem .Anthropic Team. Claude discovers a novel enzyme system with crispr-like repeats, 2026. URL https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-discovers-novel-enzyme-system .J. L. Araus, S. C. Kefauver, M. Zaman-Allah, M. S. Olsen, and J. E. Cairns. Translating high-throughput phenotyping into genetic gain. 

Trends in plant science , 23(5):451–466, 2018. 

> 33 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

M. D. Ari, J. Iskander, J. Araujo, C. Casey, J. Kools, B. Chen, R. Swain, M. Kelly, and T. Popovic. A science impact framework to measure impact beyond journal metrics. PLoS One , 15(12): e0244407, 2020. K. Arrow. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity/Princeton University , 1962. P. Arzberger, P. Schroeder, A. Beaulieu, G. Bowker, K. Casey, L. Laaksonen, D. Moorman, P. Uhlir, and P. Wouters. Promoting access to public re-search data for scientific, economic, and social development. Data Science Journal , 3:135–152, 2004. J. Ashkinaze, J. Mendelsohn, L. Qiwei, C. Budak, and E. Gilbert. How ai ideas affect the creativ-ity, diversity, and evolution of human ideas: evidence from a large, dynamic experiment. In Proceedings of the ACM collective intelligence conference , pages 198–213, 2025. S. Askin, D. Burkhalter, G. Calado, and S. El Dakrouni. Artificial intelligence applied to clinical trials: opportunities and challenges. 

Health and technology , 13(2):203–213, 2023. A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. E. Hein, and J. Schrier. Com-mit: Mini article for dynamic reporting of in-cremental improvements to previous scholarly work. Digital Discovery , 4(2):301–302, 2025. A. Aubret, L. Matignon, and S. Hassas. A survey on intrinsic motivation in reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06976 , 2019. D. H. Autor. Why are there still so many jobs? the history and future of workplace automation. 

Journal of economic perspectives , 29(3):3–30, 2015. A. Avila, M. Bhargava, C. Birkar, P. Deligne, Y. Deng, S. Donaldson, H. Duminil-Copin, A. Fi-galli, M. Hairer, J. Huh, M. Kontsevich, E. Lin-denstrauss, P.-L. Lions, J. Maynard, C. Mc-Mullen, S. Mori, B. C. Ngô, A. Okounkov, P. Scholze, S. Smirnov, T. Tao, M. Viazovska, C. Villani, W. Werner, and E. Zelmanov. Asevere misalignment of ai in mathematics, Sept. 2026. URL https://www.mathandai. org/ .Ž. Avsec, N. Latysheva, J. Cheng, G. Novati, K. R. Taylor, T. Ward, C. Bycroft, L. Nicolaisen, E. Ar-vaniti, J. Pan, et al. Alphagenome: advanc-ing regulatory variant effect prediction with a unified dna sequence model. BioRxiv , pages 2025–06, 2025. P. Ayris, J.-Y. Berthou, R. Bruce, S. Lind-staedt, A. Monreale, B. Mons, Y. Murayama, C. Södergård, K. Tochtermann, and R. Wilkin-son. Realising the european open science cloud, 2016. B. Azad, R. Azad, S. Eskandari, A. Bozorgpour, A. Kazerouni, I. Rekik, and D. Merhof. Founda-tional models in medical imaging: A compre-hensive survey and future vision, 2023. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18689 .P. Azoulay, J. S. Graff Zivin, and G. Manso. In-centives and creativity: evidence from the aca-demic life sciences. The RAND Journal of Eco-nomics , 42(3):527–554, 2011. R. Bahmani, F. Brasser, G. Dessouky, P. Jauernig, M. Klimmek, A.-R. Sadeghi, and E. Stapf. 

{CURE }: A security architecture with 

{CUstomizable } and resilient enclaves. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 1073–1090, 2021. M. Baker. 1,500 scientists lift the lid on repro-ducibility, 2016. G. Ballestero, H. Hosseini, S. Khanna, and R. I. Shorrer. Strategic algorithmic monocul-ture: Experimental evidence from coordina-tion games. Papers 2604.09502, arXiv.org, Apr 2026. URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/ arx/papers/2604.09502.html .E. Bareinboim, J. D. Correa, D. Ibeling, and T. Icard. On pearl’s hierarchy and the foun-dations of causal inference. In Probabilistic and causal inference: the works of Judea Pearl , pages 507–556. ACM, 2022. A. G. Barto. Intrinsic motivation and reinforce-ment learning. In Intrinsically motivated learn-ing in natural and artificial systems , pages 17– 47. Springer, 2012. 

> 34 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

G. Baskaran and M. Schwartz. The consequences of china’s new rare earths export restrictions. 

Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) , 2025. C. Baum, J. Berlips, W. Chen, H. Cozzarini, H. Cui, I. Damgård, J. Dong, K. M. Esvelt, L. Foner, M. Gao, et al. A system capable of verifiably and privately screening global dna synthesis. 

National Science Review , page nwag103, 2026. R. B. Bausell. The problem with science: the repro-ducibility crisis and what to do about it . Oxford University Press, 2021. O. Bayley, E. Savino, A. Slattery, and T. Noël. Au-tonomous chemistry: Navigating self-driving labs in chemical and material sciences. Matter ,7(7):2382–2398, 2024. T. Benson-Tilsen and N. Soares. Formalizing con-vergent instrumental goals. In AAAI Workshop: AI, Ethics, and Society , pages 62–70, 2016. C.-T. Berezin, S. Peccoud, D. M. Kar, and J. Pec-coud. Cryptographic approaches to authen-ticating synthetic dna sequences. Trends in biotechnology , 42(8):1002–1016, 2024. P. Berg, D. Baltimore, S. Brenner, R. O. Roblin, and M. F. Singer. Summary statement of the asilo-mar conference on recombinant dna molecules. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,72(6):1981–1984, 1975. M. Biagioli and A. Lippman. Gaming the met-rics: Misconduct and manipulation in academic research . Mit Press, 2020. K. Bibbins-Domingo and A. Helman. Improving representation in clinical trials and research. 

Washington DC: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicinePolicy and Global Af-fairs , 2022. J. R. Biden. Executive order on the safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of artifi-cial intelligence, 2023. A. Birhane, A. Kasirzadeh, D. Leslie, and S. Wachter. Science in the age of large lan-guage models. Nature Reviews Physics , 5(5): 277–280, 2023. J. Birk, A. Hallin, and G. Kasieczka. Omnijet-𝛼 :the first cross-task foundation model for par-ticle physics. Machine Learning: Science and Technology , 5(3):035031, 2024. H. Bisht, V. Kumar, K. M. Jablonka, Mausam, and N. M. A. Krishnan. Agentic ai scientists are not built for autonomous scientific discovery, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605. 08956 .C. Bluethgen, P. Chambon, J.-B. Delbrouck, R. Van Der Sluijs, M. Połacin, J. M. Zambrano Chaves, T. M. Abraham, S. Purohit, C. P. Langlotz, and A. S. Chaudhari. A vision–language foundation model for the generation of realistic chest x-ray images. Nature Biomedical Engineering , 9(4): 494–506, 2025. C. Bodnar, W. P. Bruinsma, A. Lucic, M. Stanley, A. Allen, J. Brandstetter, P. Garvan, M. Riechert, J. A. Weyn, H. Dong, et al. A foundation model for the earth system. Nature , 641(8065):1180– 1187, 2025. B. Bodó, D. Gervais, and J. P. Quintais. Blockchain and smart contracts: the missing link in copy-right licensing? International Journal of Law and Information Technology , 26(4):311–336, 2018. D. A. Boiko, R. MacKnight, and G. Gomes. Emer-gent autonomous scientific research capabili-ties of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332 , 2023. R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill, et al. On the oppor-tunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 , 2021. L. Bonomi, Y. Huang, and L. Ohno-Machado. Pri-vacy challenges and research opportunities for genomic data sharing. Nature Genetics , 52(7): 646–654, 2020. N. Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strategies. Strategies , 2014. N. Bostrom. The vulnerable world hypothesis. 

Global Policy , 10(4):455–476, 2019. 

> 35 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

J. Boyko, J. Cohen, N. Fox, M. H. Veiga, J. I. Li, J. Liu, B. Modenesi, A. H. Rauch, K. N. Reid, S. Tribedi, et al. An interdisciplinary outlook on large language models for scientific research. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04929 , 2023. A. Bracco, J. Brajard, H. A. Dijkstra, P. Hassan-zadeh, C. Lessig, and C. Monteleoni. Machine learning for the physics of climate. Nature Re-views Physics , 7(1):6–20, 2025. H. Brammer. Hypercerts: A new primitive for public goods funding, 2022. URL 

## https://www.protocol.ai/blog/ hypercert-new-primitive/ .A. Brand, L. Allen, M. Altman, M. Hlava, and J. Scott. Beyond authorship: Attribution, con-tribution, collaboration, and credit. Learned Publishing , 28(2), 2015. I. Bremmer and M. Suleyman. The ai power paradox: Can states learn to govern artificial intelligence-before it’s too late? Foreign Aff. ,102:26, 2023. E. M. Bucci. On zombie papers. Cell death & disease , 10(3):189, 2019. J.-C. Burgelman, C. Pascu, K. Szkuta, R. Von Schomberg, A. Karalopoulos, K. Repanas, and M. Schouppe. Open science, open data, and open scholarship: European policies to make science fit for the twenty-first century. Frontiers in big data , 2: 43, 2019. V. Buterin, Z. Hitzig, and E. G. Weyl. A flexible design for funding public goods. Management Science , 65(11):5171–5187, 2019. G. Caldarelli. Understanding the blockchain ora-cle problem: A call for action. Information , 11 (11):509, 2020. M. L. Callaham, R. L. Wears, E. J. Weber, C. Bar-ton, and G. Young. Positive-outcome bias and other limitations in the outcome of research ab-stracts submitted to a scientific meeting. Jama ,280(3):254–257, 1998. E. Callaway. Ai can design viruses, toxins and other bioweapons. how worried should we be? 

Nature , 653(8114):344–347, 2026. Y. Cao, S. Lai, J. Huang, Y. Zhang, Z. Lawrence, R. Bhakta, I. F. Thomas, M. Cao, C.-H. Tsai, Z. Zhou, et al. Simulcost: A cost-aware benchmark and toolkit for automating physics simulations with llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20253 , 2026. J. O. Caro, A. H. d. O. Fonseca, C. Averill, S. A. Rizvi, M. Rosati, J. L. Cross, P. Mittal, E. Zappala, D. Levine, R. M. Dhodapkar, et al. Brainlm: A foundation model for brain activity recordings. BioRxiv , pages 2023–09, 2023. S. Carter, N. Wheeler, S. Chwalek, C. Isaac, and J. Yassif. The convergence of artificial intelli-gence and the life sciences: Safeguarding tech-nology, rethinking governance, and preventing catastrophe, 2023. A. Chan, K. Wei, S. Huang, N. Rajkumar, E. Perrier, S. Lazar, G. K. Hadfield, and M. Anderljung. Infrastructure for ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10114 , 2025. P. Chandak, V. Alkin, D. Wu, M. Dagan, T. D. Roy, M. C. S. Menezes, A. Noori, N. Somia, J. S. Brownstein, R. Balicer, et al. What does the ai doctor value? auditing pluralism in the clini-cal ethics of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18738 , 2026. G. Channing and A. Ghosh. Ai for scientific discov-ery is a social problem. Patterns , 7(3), 2026. K. Chauhan. Dead science walking: Publication bias and the ai scientist pipeline, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.04220 .J. Chen, Y. Hu, M. Cai, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, X. Cao, M. Lin, H. Xu, J. Wu, X. Cao, et al. Trialbench: Multi-modal ai-ready datasets for clinical trial prediction. Scientific Data , 12(1):1564, 2025. Y. Cheng, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Mao. Toward federated large language models: Motivations, methods, and future di-rections. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-rials , 27(4):2733–2764, 2024. N. Chentanez, A. Barto, and S. Singh. Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 17, 2004. 

> 36 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

Y. Chervonyi, T. H. Trinh, M. Olšák, X. Yang, H. H. Nguyen, M. Menegali, J. Jung, J. Kim, V. Verma, Q. V. Le, et al. Gold-medalist performance in solving olympiad geometry with alphageome-try2. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26 (241):1–39, 2025. Y. Chi, W. Li, D. Hong, X. Wang, M. Gao, K. Yang, B. He, Y. Zheng, C. Xiao, and Q. Na. Ai4ai-bench: Benchmarking llm agents in algorith-mic design for recursive self-improvement, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608. 20318 .M. A. Chia, F. Antaki, Y. Zhou, A. W. Turner, A. Y. Lee, and P. A. Keane. Foundation models in ophthalmology. British Journal of Ophthalmol-ogy , 108(10):1341–1348, 2024. L. T. Clark, L. Watkins, I. L. Piña, M. Elmer, O. Ak-inboboye, M. Gorham, B. Jamerson, C. McCul-lough, C. Pierre, A. B. Polis, et al. Increasing diversity in clinical trials: overcoming critical barriers. Current problems in cardiology , 44(5): 148–172, 2019. H. Collins. Tacit and explicit knowledge . University of Chicago press, 2019. L. Conteh, T. Engels, and D. H. Molyneux. Socioe-conomic aspects of neglected tropical diseases. 

The Lancet , 375(9710):239–247, 2010. COPE Council. Cope position - authorship and ai, 2024. URL https://doi.org/10.24318/ cCVRZBms . https://publicationethics. org . License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. M. Corpas, M. Pius, M. Poburennaya, H. Guio, M. Dwek, S. Nagaraj, C. Lopez-Correa, A. Pope-joy, and S. Fatumo. Bridging genomics’ greatest challenge: The diversity gap. Cell genomics , 5 (1), 2025. P. C. Cramton, Y. Shoham, R. Steinberg, and V. L. Smith. Combinatorial auctions , volume 5. MIT press Cambridge, 2006. K. A. Creel. Transparency in complex computa-tional systems. Philosophy of Science , 87(4): 568–589, 2020. W. Cui, W. Jeong, P. Thölke, T. Medani, K. Jerbi, A. A. Joshi, and R. M. Leahy. Neuro-gpt: To-wards a foundation model for eeg. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , pages 1–5. IEEE, 2024. M. L. Cummings. Automation bias in intelligent time critical decision support systems. In Deci-sion making in aviation , pages 289–294. Rout-ledge, 2017. J. Cunningham, N. Davies, S. Devaney, M. Hard-ing, S. Holm, V. Neumann, C. Smith, and J. Ainsworth. A review of medical data sharing initiatives with a focus on the use of blockchain technologies: Qualitative comparative analy-sis. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 28: e63575, 2026. A. Cuntz, C. Fink, and H. Stamm. Artificial intel-ligence and intellectual property: An economic perspective, 2024. T. Dai, S. Vijayakrishnan, F. T. Szczypiński, J.-F. Ayme, E. Simaei, T. Fellowes, R. Clowes, L. Kotopanov, C. E. Shields, Z. Zhou, et al. Au-tonomous mobile robots for exploratory syn-thetic chemistry. Nature , 635(8040):890–897, 2024. H. Dalla-Torre, L. Gonzalez, J. Mendoza-Revilla, N. Lopez Carranza, A. H. Grzywaczewski, F. Oteri, C. Dallago, E. Trop, B. P. De Almeida, H. Sirelkhatim, et al. Nucleotide transformer: building and evaluating robust foundation mod-els for human genomics. Nature Methods , 22 (2):287–297, 2025. C. R. Davies. An evolutionary step in intellec-tual property rights–artificial intelligence and intellectual property. Computer Law & Security Review , 27(6):601–619, 2011. M. De Boer and K. Lammertsma. Scarcity of rare earth elements. ChemSusChem , 6(11):2045– 2055, 2013. K. De Smedt, D. Koureas, and P. Wittenburg. Fair digital objects for science: From data pieces to actionable knowledge units. Publications , 8(2): 21, 2020. 

> 37 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

J. A. DiMasi, H. G. Grabowski, and R. W. Hansen. Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: new estimates of R&D costs. Journal of health eco-nomics , 47:20–33, 2016. T. Ding, A. Nannapaneni, B. Liu, and L. Zhang. Autonomous research agents: A survey of ai scientists and the verification gap, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05179 .W. Ding, J. Hou, J. Li, C. Guo, J. Qin, R. Kozma, and F.-Y. Wang. Desci based on web3 and dao: A comprehensive overview and reference model. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems , 9(5):1563–1573, 2022. U. Dirnagl and M. Lauritzen. Fighting publication bias: introducing the negative results section, 2010. B. Doleman, J. P. Williams, and J. Lund. Why most published meta-analysis findings are false. 

Techniques in Coloproctology , 23(9):925–928, 2019. Z. Dong, R. Li, Y. Wu, T. T. Nguyen, J. S. Chong, F. Ji, N. R. Tong, C. L. Chen, and J. H. Zhou. Brain-jepa: Brain dynamics foundation model with gradient positioning and spatiotemporal masking. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:86048–86073, 2024. T. W. Dornis. Artificial intelligence and innova-tion: the end of patent law as we know it. Yale JL & Tech. , 23:97, 2020. W. W. Dou, I. Goldstein, and Y. Ji. Ai-powered trading, algorithmic collusion, and price effi-ciency. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2025. J. R. Douceur. The sybil attack. In International workshop on peer-to-peer systems , pages 251– 260. Springer, 2002. A. Dreber, T. Pfeiffer, J. Almenberg, S. Isaksson, B. Wilson, Y. Chen, B. A. Nosek, and M. Johan-nesson. Using prediction markets to estimate the reproducibility of scientific research. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,112(50):15343–15347, 2015. Y. Du, S. Li, A. Torralba, J. B. Tenenbaum, and I. Mordatch. Improving factuality and reason-ing in language models through multiagent de-bate. In Forty-first international conference on machine learning , 2024. E. Duede. Deep learning opacity in scientific dis-covery. Philosophy of Science , 90(5):1089–1099, Feb. 2023. ISSN 1539-767X. doi: 10.1017/ psa.2023.8. URL http://dx.doi.org/10. 1017/psa.2023.8 .L. Duo, Y. Hao, and J. He. Autonomous materi-als synthesis laboratories: Integrating artificial intelligence with advanced robotics for acceler-ated discovery, 2025. W. P. Duprex, R. A. Fouchier, M. J. Imperiale, M. Lipsitch, and D. A. Relman. Gain-of-function experiments: time for a real debate. Nature Reviews Microbiology , 13(1):58–64, 2015. T. Duston, S. Xin, Y. Sun, D. Zan, A. Li, S. Xin, K. Shen, Y. Chen, Q. Sun, G. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Liu, Z. Pu, Y. Wang, B.-X. Ge, X. Tong, F. Ye, Z.-C. Zhao, W.-B. Han, Z. Cao, Y. Zhao, W. Ren, Q. Long, Y. Liu, A. Huang, Y. Du, Y. Rong, and J. Peng. Ainstein-bench: Benchmarking coding agents on scien-tific repositories, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2512.21373 .C. Dwork. Differential privacy: A survey of results. In International conference on theory and appli-cations of models of computation , pages 1–19. Springer, 2008. R. Edison, S. Toner, and K. M. Esvelt. Assembling unregulated dna segments bypasses synthesis screening: regulate fragments as select agents. 

Nature Communications , 2026. R. S. Eisenberg. Obvious to whom? evaluating in-ventions from the perspective of phosita. Berke-ley Technology Law Journal , 19(3):885–906, 2004. E. J. Emanuel, D. Wendler, and C. Grady. What makes clinical research ethical? In Research Ethics , pages 229–239. Routledge, 2017. 

> 38 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

N. Emery-Xu, R. Jordan, and R. Trager. Inter-national governance of advancing artificial in-telligence. AI & SOCIETY , 40(4):3019–3044, 2025. J. M. Esanu, P. F. Uhlir, N. R. Council, et al. The economic logic of “open science” and the bal-ance between private property rights and the public domain in scientific data and informa-tion: a primer. In The role of scientific and technical data and information in the public do-main: Proceedings of a symposium . National Academies Press (US), 2003. J. A. Evans and J. Reimer. Open access and global participation in science. Science , 323(5917): 1025–1025, 2009. L. Evans and P. Bryant. Lhc machine. Journal of instrumentation , 3(08):S08001–S08001, 2008. R. Evans, M. O’neill, A. Pritzel, N. Antropova, A. Senior, T. Green, A. Žídek, R. Bates, S. Black-well, J. Yim, et al. Protein complex prediction with alphafold-multimer. biorxiv , pages 2021– 10, 2021. D. Fanelli. Is science really facing a reproducibility crisis, and do we need it to? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(11):2628– 2631, 2018. J.-L. Fattebert and F. Gygi. Density functional the-ory for efficient ab initio molecular dynamics simulations in solution. Journal of computa-tional chemistry , 23(6):662–666, 2002. A. Fawzi, M. Balog, A. Huang, T. Hubert, B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, F. J. R. Ruiz, J. Schrittwieser, G. Swirszcz, et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algo-rithms with reinforcement learning. Nature ,610(7930):47–53, 2022. S. Fazelpour, J. O’Brien, and H. Rubin. Navigating epistemic monocultures in ai-driven science: A simulation study, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2608.19390 .N. Feasey, M. Wansbrough-Jones, D. C. Mabey, and A. W. Solomon. Neglected tropical diseases. 

British medical bulletin , 93(1):179–200, 2010. T. Feng, T. Trinh, G. Bingham, J. Kang, S. Zhang, S. hyun Kim, K. Barreto, C. Schildkraut, J. Jung, J. Seo, C. Pagano, Y. Chervonyi, D. Hwang, K. Hou, S. Gukov, C.-C. Tsai, H. Choi, Y. Jin, W.-Y. Li, H.-A. Wu, R.-A. Shiu, Y.-S. Shih, Q. V. Le, and T. Luong. Semi-Autonomous Mathe-matics Discovery with Gemini: A Case Study on the Erdős Problems, 2026a. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2601.22401 .T. Feng, T. H. Trinh, G. Bingham, D. Hwang, Y. Chervonyi, J. Jung, J. Lee, C. Pagano, S.-h. Kim, F. Pasqualotto, et al. Towards au-tonomous mathematics research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10177 , 2026b. W. Feng, P. Gao, and X. Wang. Ai breeder: Ge-nomic predictions for crop breeding. New Crops ,1:100010, 2024. W. L. Filho, R. Kotter, P. G. Özuyar, I. R. Abubakar, J. H. P. P. Eustachio, and N. R. Matandirotya. Understanding rare earth elements as criti-cal raw materials. Sustainability , 15(3):1919, 2023. D. Filippi et al. Smart contracts. Internet Policy Review , 10(2), 2021. M. Fire and C. Guestrin. Over-optimization of academic publishing metrics: observing good-hart’s law in action. GigaScience , 8(6):giz053, 2019. S. Fish, Y. A. Gonczarowski, and R. I. Shorrer. Algorithmic collusion by large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00806 , 7(2):5, 2024. L. Fleming. Recombinant uncertainty in tech-nological search. Management science , 47(1): 117–132, 2001. M. Florio, S. Forte, and E. Sirtori. Forecasting the socio-economic impact of the large hadron collider: A cost–benefit analysis to 2025 and beyond. Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 112:38–53, 2016. T. S. Foster, B. A. Omari, T. Fu, T. Mann, C. Domond, L. Cipolina-Kun, B. Gauri, M. Aghamelu, A. D. Goldie, E. Helenowski, J.-C. Gagnon-Audet, A. Pepe, S. Nazir, D. Iz-covich, N. Levi, R. Hazra, K. Hambardzumyan, 

> 39 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

N. Baldwin, X. Li, M. Josifoski, P. Giampouras, M. J. Sabet, A. Sims, H. Momand, T. Shavrina, D. Magka, J. Weston, Y. Wang, A. Goyal, J. Hen-riques, Y. Bachrach, E. McMilin, and J. N. Foer-ster. Ai research preference models, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.13940 .R. A. Fouchier, A. García-Sastre, Y. Kawaoka, W. S. Barclay, N. M. Bouvier, I. H. Brown, I. Capua, H. Chen, R. W. Compans, R. B. Couch, et al. Transmission studies resume for avian flu. Sci-ence , 339(6119):520–521, 2013. B. Freedman. Equipoise and the ethics of clin-ical research. In human experimentation and research , pages 427–431. Routledge, 2017. Y. Fukataki, W. Hayashi, N. Nishimoto, and Y. M. Ito. Developing artificial intelligence tools for institutional review board pre-review: A pilot study on chatgpt’s accuracy and reproducibility. 

PLOS Digital Health , 4(6):e0000695, 2025. K. Fushimi, Y. Nakai, A. Nishi, R. Suzuki, M. Ikegami, R. Nimura, T. Tomono, R. Hidese, H. Yasueda, Y. Tagawa, et al. Development of the autonomous lab system to support biotech-nology research. Scientific Reports , 15(1):6648, 2025. E. Galkina Cleary, J. M. Beierlein, N. S. Khanuja, L. M. McNamee, and F. D. Ledley. Contribution of nih funding to new drug approvals 2010– 2016. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(10):2329–2334, 2018. J. Gao, J. Chang, H. Que, Y. Xiong, S. Zhang, X. Qi, Z. Liu, J.-J. Wang, Q. Ding, X. Li, et al. Unilabos: An ai-native operating system for autonomous laboratories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21766 ,2025. B. Garfinkel and A. Dafoe. How does the offense-defense balance scale? In Emerging Technolo-gies and International Stability , pages 247–274. Routledge, 2021. F. Garrido-Lucero, B. Heymann, M. Vono, P. Loiseau, and V. Perchet. Du-shapley: A shap-ley value proxy for efficient dataset valuation. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 37:1973–2000, 2024. E. Geisler. The metrics of science and technology .Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2000. A. Gelman and E. Loken. The garden of fork-ing paths: Why multiple comparisons can be a problem, even when there is no “fishing expe-dition” or “p-hacking” and the research hypoth-esis was posited ahead of time. Department of Statistics, Columbia University , 348(1-17):3, 2013. A. Ghorbani and J. Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning. In Inter-national conference on machine learning , pages 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019. S. Gjerstad and J. Dickhaut. Price formation in double auctions. Games and economic behavior ,22(1):1–29, 1998. P. D. Gluckman, V. C. Turekian, R. W. Grimes, and T. Kishi. Science diplomacy: a pragmatic per-spective from the inside. Science & Diplomacy ,6(4):1–13, 2017. M. Goldblum, D. Tsipras, C. Xie, X. Chen, A. Schwarzschild, D. Song, A. Madry, B. Li, and T. Goldstein. Dataset security for machine learning: Data poisoning, backdoor attacks, and defenses, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2012.10544 .S. Goldwasser, S. Micali, and C. Rackoff. The knowledge complexity of interactive proof sys-tems. SIAM Journal on Computing , 18(1):186– 208, 1989. doi: 10.1137/0218012. URL 

## https://doi.org/10.1137/0218012 .L. Gomes, J. Kueck, M. Mattes, M. Spindler, and A. Zaytsev. Collusion detection with graph neu-ral networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07091 ,2024. G. Gong, J. Liu, S. Pandya, C. Taborda, N. Wiesen-danger, N. Price, W. Byron, A. Coppi, P. Young, C. Wiess, et al. Clinical trial patient matching: A real-time, common data model and artificial intelligence–driven system for semiautomated patient prescreening in cancer clinical trials. 

JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics , 10:e2500262, 2026. 

> 40 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy. Ex-plaining and harnessing adversarial examples. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 , 2014. J. Gottweis, W.-H. Weng, A. Daryin, T. Tu, A. Palepu, P. Sirkovic, A. Myaskovsky, F. Weis-senberger, K. Rong, R. Tanno, K. Saab, D. Popovici, J. Blum, F. Zhang, K. Chou, A. Has-sidim, B. Gokturk, A. Vahdat, P. Kohli, Y. Matias, A. Carroll, K. Kulkarni, N. Tomasev, Y. Guan, V. Dhillon, E. D. Vaishnav, B. Lee, T. R. D. Costa, J. R. Penadés, G. Peltz, Y. Xu, A. Pawlosky, A. Karthikesalingam, and V. Natarajan. To-wards an ai co-scientist, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2502.18864 .H. G. Grabowski and M. Kyle. Generic competition and market exclusivity periods in pharmaceu-ticals. Managerial and Decision Economics , 28 (4-5):491–502, 2007. P. Groth, A. Gibson, and J. Velterop. The anatomy of a nanopublication. Information services and use , 30(1-2):51–56, 2010. K. Guo, Z. Yang, C.-H. Yu, and M. J. Buehler. Artifi-cial intelligence and machine learning in design of mechanical materials. Materials Horizons , 8 (4):1153–1172, 2021. L. L. Guo, E. Steinberg, S. L. Fleming, J. Posada, J. Lemmon, S. R. Pfohl, N. Shah, J. Fries, and L. Sung. Ehr foundation models improve robust-ness in the presence of temporal distribution shift. Scientific Reports , 13(1):3767, 2023. L. L. Guo, J. Fries, E. Steinberg, S. L. Fleming, K. Morse, C. Aftandilian, J. Posada, N. Shah, and L. Sung. A multi-center study on the adapt-ability of a shared foundation model for elec-tronic health records. NPJ digital medicine , 7 (1):171, 2024. J. O. Gyapong, M. Gohoho, A. K. Manyeh, M. Im-murana, and M. Gyapong. Current state and future directions of interventions for neglected tropical diseases. Nature Human Behaviour , 9 (8):1557–1570, 2025. B. Gyevnár, A. Kasirzadeh, and N. B. Shah. Dis-tributed denial of science: How indirect data poisoning of ai systems can industrialize scien-tific fraud. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.10712 ,2026. T. Ha, D. Lee, Y. Kwon, M. S. Park, S. Lee, J. Jang, B. Choi, H. Jeon, J. Kim, H. Choi, et al. Ai-driven robotic chemist for autonomous synthesis of organic molecules. Science advances , 9(44): eadj0461, 2023. L. Hammond, A. Chan, J. Clifton, J. Hoelscher-Obermaier, A. Khan, E. McLean, C. Smith, W. Barfuss, J. Foerster, T. Gavenčiak, et al. Multi-agent risks from advanced ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14143 , 2025. R. Hanson. Could gambling save science? en-couraging an honest consensus. A Journal of Knowledge, Culture and Policy , 1995. M. Hao, J. Gong, X. Zeng, C. Liu, Y. Guo, X. Cheng, T. Wang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, and L. Song. Large-scale foundation model on single-cell transcrip-tomics. Nature Methods , 21(8):1481–1491, 2024. Q. Hao, F. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Evans. Artificial in-telligence tools expand scientists’ impact but contract science’s focus. Nature , 649(8099): 1237–1243, 2026. J. R. Harper. The future of scientific publish-ing: Automated article generation, 2024. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17586 .S. Harrer, P. Shah, B. Antony, and J. Hu. Artifi-cial intelligence for clinical trial design. Trends in pharmacological sciences , 40(8):577–591, 2019. J. He, S. Houde, and J. D. Weisz. Which contribu-tions deserve credit? perceptions of attribution in human-ai co-creation. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI conference on human factors in com-puting systems , pages 1–18, 2025a. X. D. He, C. Yang, and Y. Zhou. Optimal design of automated market makers on decentralized exchanges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13291 ,2024. Y. He, P. Fang, Y. Shan, Y. Pan, Y. Wei, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Zeng, Z. Zhou, et al. General-ized biological foundation model with unified 

> 41 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

nucleic acid and protein language. Nature Ma-chine Intelligence , 7(6):942–953, 2025b. A. Head, K. Lo, D. Kang, R. Fok, S. Skjonsberg, D. S. Weld, and M. A. Hearst. Augmenting scien-tific papers with just-in-time, position-sensitive definitions of terms and symbols. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–18, 2021. B. Hedden and M. Raghavan. Algorithmic mono-culture and its critics, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2604.06047 .S. W. Hee, A. Willis, C. Tudur Smith, S. Day, F. Miller, J. Madan, M. Posch, S. Zohar, and N. Stallard. Does the low prevalence affect the sample size of interventional clinical trials of rare diseases? an analysis of data from the ag-gregate analysis of clinicaltrials. gov. Orphanet journal of rare diseases , 12(1):44, 2017. R. Heesen and L. K. Bright. Publication bias is bad for science if not necessarily scientists. Royal Society Open Science , 12(4), 2025. G. C. Hegerl and S. Solomon. Risks of climate en-gineering. Science , 325(5943):955–956, 2009. E. C. Hettinger. Justifying intellectual property. 

Philosophy & Public Affairs , pages 31–52, 1989. S. G. Higgins, A. A. Nogiwa-Valdez, and M. M. Stevens. Considerations for implementing elec-tronic laboratory notebooks in an academic research environment. Nature Protocols , 17(2): 179–189, 2022. K. E. Himma. The justification of intellectual prop-erty: Contemporary philosophical disputes. 

Journal of the American Society for Informa-tion Science and Technology , 59(7):1143–1161, 2008. S. A. Hollingsworth and R. O. Dror. Molecular dynamics simulation for all. Neuron , 99(6): 1129–1143, 2018. M. C. Horowitz. Artificial intelligence, interna-tional competition, and the balance of power. 

Texas national security review , 1(3):37–57, 2018. M. K. Horton, P. Huck, R. X. Yang, J. M. Munro, S. Dwaraknath, A. M. Ganose, R. S. Kingsbury, M. Wen, J. X. Shen, T. S. Mathis, et al. Accel-erated data-driven materials science with the materials project. Nature Materials , 24(10): 1522–1532, 2025. M. Hosseini, D. B. Resnik, and K. Holmes. The ethics of disclosing the use of artificial intelli-gence tools in writing scholarly manuscripts. 

Research Ethics , 19(4):449–465, 2023. A. R. Hosseinpoor, N. Bergen, and A. Schlotheuber. Promoting health eq-uity: WHO health inequality monitoring at global and national levels. Global health action ,8(1):29034, 2015. P. Huang, X. Zhang, Z. Cao, S. Liu, M. Xu, W. Ding, J. Francis, B. Chen, and D. Zhao. What went wrong? closing the sim-to-real gap via differ-entiable causal discovery, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2306.15864 .T. Hubert, R. Mehta, L. Sartran, M. Z. Horváth, G. Žužić, E. Wieser, A. Huang, J. Schrittwieser, Y. Schroecker, H. Masoom, et al. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with rein-forcement learning. Nature , pages 1–3, 2025. M. Hulme. Can science fix climate change?: A case against climate engineering . John Wiley & Sons, 2014. P. Humphreys. Extending ourselves: Computa-tional science, empiricism, and scientific method .Oxford University Press, 2004. Innovation, Science and Economic De-velopment Canada. AI Compute Ac-cess Fund, 2026a. URL https:// ised-isde.canada.ca/site/ised/en/ canadian-sovereign-ai-compute-strategy/ ai-compute-access-fund . Accessed: 19 May 2026. Innovation, Science and Economic Devel-opment Canada. Canadian Sovereign AI Compute Strategy, 2026b. URL https:// ised-isde.canada.ca/site/ised/en/ canadian-sovereign-ai-compute-strategy .Accessed: 19 May 2026. 

> 42 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

International Energy Agency. Global critical minerals outlook 2025. Tech-nical report, IEA, Paris, 2025. URL 

## https://www.iea.org/reports/ global-critical-minerals-outlook-2025 .Licence: CC BY 4.0. J. P. Ioannidis. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS medicine , 2(8):e124, 2005. J. P. Ioannidis. Why most published research findings are false. Chance , 32(1):4–13, 2019. A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, et al. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome ap-proach to accelerating materials innovation. 

APL materials , 1(1), 2013. D. Jannach and C. Bauer. Escaping the mcnamara fallacy: Towards more impactful recommender systems research. Ai Magazine , 41(4):79–95, 2020. B. Jansky, T. Hendl, and A. Z. Nocanda. Patient-led innovation and global health justice: open-source digital health technology for type 1 dia-betes care. Bioethics , 38(6):511–528, 2024. J. A. Jeevarajan, T. Joshi, M. Parhizi, T. Rauhala, and D. Juarez-Robles. Battery hazards for large energy storage systems, 2022. R. Jia, D. Dao, B. Wang, F. A. Hubis, N. Hynes, N. M. Gürel, B. Li, C. Zhang, D. Song, and C. J. Spanos. Towards efficient data valuation based on the shapley value. In The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics ,pages 1167–1176. PMLR, 2019. Y. Jiang, W. Lou, L. Wang, Z. Tang, S. Feng, J. Lu, H. Sun, Y. Pan, S. Gu, H. Su, F. Liu, W. Wei, P. Tan, D. Zhou, F. Ling, C. Tan, B. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Bai, and B. Zhou. Scp: Accel-erating discovery with a global web of au-tonomous scientific agents, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2512.24189 .W. G. Johnson and D. M. Bowman. A survey of instruments and institutions available for the global governance of artificial intelligence. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine , 40(4):68–76, 2021. J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Fig-urnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with al-phafold. nature , 596(7873):583–589, 2021. A. Kale, M. Kay, and J. Hullman. Decision-making under uncertainty in research synthesis: De-signing for the garden of forking paths. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on hu-man factors in computing systems , pages 1–14, 2019. B. Kang, J. Gu, J. Lv, W. Li, L. Wang, and Y. Gao. Harness continual learning: Continual adap-tation beyond model parameters, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.19013 .S. Kapoor and A. Narayanan. Leakage and the re-producibility crisis in machine-learning-based science. Patterns , 4(9), 2023. S. Kapoor, R. Bommasani, K. Klyman, S. Long-pre, A. Ramaswami, P. Cihon, A. Hopkins, K. Bankston, S. Biderman, M. Bogen, et al. On the societal impact of open foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07918 , 2024. A. Kasirzadeh and I. Gabriel. Agentic profiles for effective ai governance. Nature , 656(8127): 320–328, 2026. Q. Ke, E. Ferrara, F. Radicchi, and A. Flammini. Defining and identifying sleeping beauties in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112(24):7426–7431, 2015. D. Keith. A case for climate engineering . MIT Press, 2013. E. Kiciman, R. Ness, A. Sharma, and C. Tan. Causal reasoning and large language models: Opening a new frontier for causality. Transac-tions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. C. Kim, S. Kumar, and M. Sked. Inventorship guidance for ai-assisted inventions, 2024. S. H. King, C. L. Driscoll, D. B. Li, D. Guo, A. T. Merchant, G. Brixi, M. E. Wilkinson, and B. L. 

> 43 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

Hie. Generative design of bacteriophages with genome language models. Science , 393(6811): eaec2657, 2026. M. Kinniment, L. J. K. Sato, H. Du, B. Goodrich, M. Hasin, L. Chan, L. H. Miles, T. R. Lin, H. Wijk, J. Burget, et al. Evaluating language-model agents on realistic autonomous tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11671 , 2023. K. Kirkpatrick. The carbon footprint of artificial intelligence. Communications of the ACM , 66 (8):17–19, 2023. B. Knott, S. Venkataraman, A. Hannun, S. Sen-gupta, M. Ibrahim, and L. van der Maaten. Crypten: Secure multi-party computation meets machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:4961–4973, 2021. P. W. Koh and P. Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In Inter-national conference on machine learning , pages 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017. R. Kohavi, D. Tang, and Y. Xu. Trustworthy online controlled experiments: A practical guide to a/b testing . Cambridge University Press, 2020. L. Kong, X. Sun, W. Chow, L. Li, K. Q. Lin, X. B. Zhang, S. Wang, R. Li, Q. Wu, W. Gao, Y. Wang, S. Xie, J. Liu, L. Qu, S. Li, L. X. Ng, B. R. Cot-tereau, Z. Liu, T.-S. Chua, and W. T. Ooi. AI for Auto-Research: Roadmap & User Guide, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605. 18661 .T. Korbak, M. Balesni, E. Barnes, Y. Bengio, J. Ben-ton, J. Bloom, M. Chen, A. Cooney, A. Dafoe, A. Dragan, et al. Chain of thought monitorabil-ity: A new and fragile opportunity for ai safety. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.11473 , 2025. M. Kremer, J. Levin, and C. M. Snyder. Advance market commitments: insights from theory and experience. In AEA Papers and Proceedings ,volume 110, pages 269–273. American Eco-nomic Association 2014 Broadway, Suite 305, Nashville, TN 37203, 2020. W. Kuang, B. Qian, Z. Li, D. Chen, D. Gao, X. Pan, Y. Xie, Y. Li, B. Ding, and J. Zhou. Federatedscope-llm: A comprehensive package for fine-tuning large language models in feder-ated learning. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 5260–5271, 2024. T. S. Kuhn and I. Hacking. The structure of sci-entific revolutions , volume 2. University of Chicago press Chicago, 1970. T. D. Kulkarni, K. Narasimhan, A. Saeedi, and J. Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 29, 2016. R. Kumar, S. P. Das, B. U. Choudhury, A. Kumar, N. R. Prakash, R. Verma, M. Chakraborti, A. G. Devi, B. Bhattacharjee, R. Das, et al. Advances in genomic tools for plant breeding: harnessing dna molecular markers, genomic selection, and genome editing. Biological Research , 57(1):80, 2024. T.-T. Kuo, H.-E. Kim, and L. Ohno-Machado. Blockchain distributed ledger technologies for biomedical and health care applications. Jour-nal of the American Medical Informatics Associa-tion , 24(6):1211–1220, 2017. K. Kusumegi, X. Yang, P. Ginsparg, M. de Vaan, T. Stuart, and Y. Yin. Scientific production in the era of large language models. Science , 390 (6779):1240–1243, 2025. M. S. Lau, C. J. E. Metcalf, Z. Liu, B. T. Grenfell, and W. Jin. Toward ai foundation models for epidemics: Promise, challenges, and paths for-ward. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 123(13):e2526192123, 2026. M. Lavrichenko. Thaler v. vidal: Artificial intelligence-can the invented become the in-ventor. CARDOZo L. REv. , 44:699, 2022. J.-A. Lee, R. M. Hilty, and K.-C. Liu. Artificial intelligence and intellectual property . Oxford University Press (UK), 2021. K.-F. Lee. AI superpowers: China, Silicon Val-ley, and the new world order . Harper Business, 2018. 

> 44 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

M. A. Lemley. The surprising virtues of treating trade secrets as IP rights. In The law and theory of trade secrecy . Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011. M. K. Leung, A. Delong, B. Alipanahi, and B. J. Frey. Machine learning in genomic medicine: a review of computational problems and data sets. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104(1):176–197, 2015. B. N. Levine, C. Shields, and N. B. Margolin. A survey of solutions to the sybil attack. University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA , 7:224, 2006. D. S. Levine and T. Sichelman. Why do startups use trade secrets. Notre Dame L. Rev. , 94:751, 2018. B. Li, H. Fei, T. Ju, M.-L. Lee, and W. Hsu. Omni-scientist: An omni-modal omni-discipline ai sci-entist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.13558 , 2026a. J. Li, K. Lim, H. Yang, Z. Ren, S. Raghavan, P.-Y. Chen, T. Buonassisi, and X. Wang. Ai applica-tions through the whole life cycle of material discovery. Matter , 3(2):393–432, 2020. X. Li, B. Zhao, G. Yang, T. Xiang, J. Weng, and R. H. Deng. A survey of secure computation using trusted execution environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12150 , 2023. Z. Li, L. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, B. Li, R. Wu, J. Jin, and J. Zhang. Kiss - knowledge infras-tructure for scientific simulation: A scaffold-ing for agentic earth science, 2026b. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.17856 .C. Liu, W. Zhuang, L. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Yao, X. Sun, and W. W. Hu. Re-search progress in high-throughput dna syn-thesis and its applications. Journal of Materials Chemistry B , 13(27):7973–8004, 2025. J. Liu, J. Pei, J. Huang, C. Si, A. Qu, X. Tang, R. Lu, L. Chen, X. Bai, H. Zheng, C. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Ye, Y. Fu, Z. He, Z. Jin, Z. Zhang, S. Sun, M. Harmon, J. D. Wang, J. Zeng, J. Sun, M. Wu, B. Zhou, C. You, S. Lu, Y. Qiu, F. Lai, Y. Yuan, Y. Li, J. Hong, R. Zhu, B. Chen, A. Pentland, A. Chen, M. Chowdhury, and Z. Zhang. The last human-written paper: Agent-native research artifacts, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2604.24658 .Y. Lou, H. Hu, S. Ma, Z. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Ge, and X. Tao. Drf: Llm-agent dynamic reputation filtering framework. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing , pages 127– 141. Springer, 2025. C. Lu, C. Lu, R. T. Lange, J. Foerster, J. Clune, and D. Ha. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discov-ery, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2408.06292 .C. Lu, C. Lu, R. T. Lange, Y. Yamada, S. Hu, J. Foerster, D. Ha, and J. Clune. Towards end-to-end automation of ai re-search. Nature , 651(8107):914–919, mar 2026. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-026-10265-5. URL https://doi. org/10.1038/s41586-026-10265-5 .X. Lu, C. Yang, L. Liang, G. Hu, Z. Zhong, and Z. Jiang. Artificial intelligence for optimizing recruitment and retention in clinical trials: a scoping review. Journal of the American Medi-cal Informatics Association , 31(11):2749–2759, 2024b. S. Luccioni, B. Gamazaychikov, S. Hooker, R. Pier-rard, E. Strubell, Y. Jernite, and C.-J. Wu. Light bulbs have energy ratings—so why can’t ai chat-bots? Nature , 632(8026):736–738, 2024a. S. Luccioni, Y. Jernite, and E. Strubell. Power hungry processing: Watts driving the cost of ai deployment? In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency , pages 85–99, 2024b. S. Luccioni, B. Trevelin, and M. Mitchell. The environmental impacts of ai–primer. Hugging Face Blog , 2024c. A. M. Lunt, H. Fakhruldeen, G. Pizzuto, L. Long-ley, A. White, N. Rankin, R. Clowes, B. Alston, L. Gigli, G. M. Day, et al. Modular, multi-robot integration of laboratories: an autonomous workflow for solid-state chemistry. Chemical Science , 15(7):2456–2463, 2024. 

> 45 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

Z. Luo, A. Kasirzadeh, and N. B. Shah. The more you automate, the less you see: Hidden pitfalls of ai scientist systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08713 , 2025. D. Ma, J. Pang, M. B. Gotway, and J. Liang. A fully open ai foundation model applied to chest ra-diography. Nature , 643(8071):488–498, 2025. M. A. Ma, D. E. Gutiérrez, J. M. Frausto, and W. K. Al-Delaimy. Minority representation in clinical trials in the united states: trends over the past 25 years. In Mayo Clinic Proceedings ,volume 96, pages 264–266. Elsevier, 2021. Y. Ma, Z. Gou, J. Hao, R. Xu, S. Wang, L. Pan, Y. Yang, Y. Cao, and A. Sun. Sciagent: Tool-augmented language models for scientific rea-soning. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-cessing , pages 15701–15736, 2024a. Y. Ma, Z. Zhang, B. Jia, and Y. Yuan. Automated high-throughput dna synthesis and assembly. 

Heliyon , 10(6), 2024b. M. A. Majumder, R. Cook-Deegan, and A. L. McGuire. Beyond our borders? public resis-tance to global genomic data sharing. PLoS biology , 14(11):e2000206, 2016. S. P. Mann, M. Aboy, J. J. Seah, Z. Lin, X. Luo, D. Rodger, H. Zohny, T. Minssen, J. Savulescu, and B. D. Earp. Ai and the future of academic peer review, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2509.14189 .M. Marks and C. E. Haupt. Ai chatbots, health privacy, and challenges to hipaa compliance. 

Jama , 330(4), 2023. F. Massadeh, F. Alnusair, A. A. Mahdi Massadeh, and M. Ismail. The legal protection of artificial intelligence-generated work: The argument for sui generis over copyright. Corporate Law & Governance Review , 6(1), 2024. K. McKibbin and M. Shabani. Genomic data as a national strategic resource: implications for the genomic commons and international data sharing for biomedical research and innovation. 

Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics , 51(2):301– 313, 2023. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics ,pages 1273–1282. Pmlr, 2017. D. Mehta, N. Harihar, S. Patel, N. L. Sanil, R. Shal-lam, M. J. Roddy, F. Ribeiro, T. Pan, C. Rose, T. Beyondr, et al. Marketplace for impact certificates. In Companion Publication of the 2024 Conference on Computer-Supported Co-operative Work and Social Computing , pages 75–78, 2024. L. Meincke, G. Nave, and C. Terwiesch. Chatgpt decreases idea diversity in brainstorming. Na-ture Human Behaviour , 9(6):1107–1109, 2025. A. Meiseles, I. Rosenberg, Y. Motro, L. Rokach, and J. Moran-Gilad. Adversarial vulnera-bility of deep learning models in analyzing next generation sequencing data. In 2020 IEEE international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine (BIBM) , pages 464–468. IEEE, 2020. F. Mendonca, G. DiMarzo, and N. Abdennad-her. Data cooperatives: Democratic models for ethical data stewardship. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10058 , 2025. A. Merchant, S. Batzner, S. S. Schoenholz, M. Aykol, G. Cheon, and E. D. Cubuk. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature ,624(7990):80–85, 2023. L. Messeri and M. J. Crockett. Artificial intelli-gence and illusions of understanding in scien-tific research. Nature , 627(8002):49–58, 2024. V. Mignon and M. Joëts. Slaying the Undead: How Long Does It Take to Kill Zombie Papers? working paper or preprint, 2025. URL https: //hal.science/hal-04940088 .J. Milionis, C. C. Moallemi, T. Roughgarden, and A. L. Zhang. Automated market mak-ing and loss-versus-rebalancing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06046 , 2022. Y. Millo, F. Muniesa, N. S. Panourgias, and S. V. Scott. Organised detachment: Clearinghouse 

> 46 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

mechanisms in financial markets. Information and Organization , 15(3):229–246, 2005. P. Mirowski and R. Van Horn. The contract re-search organization and the commercialization of scientific research. Social studies of science ,35(4):503–548, 2005. P. Missier, K. Belhajjame, and J. Cheney. The w3c prov family of specifications for mod-elling provenance metadata. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on extending database technology , pages 773–776, 2013. A. K. Mitra and A. R. Mawson. Neglected tropi-cal diseases: epidemiology and global burden. 

Tropical medicine and infectious disease , 2(3): 36, 2017. T. Miyakawa. No raw data, no science: another possible source of the reproducibility crisis, 2020. A. Mlinarić, M. Horvat, and V. Šupak Smolčić. Dealing with the positive publication bias: Why you should really publish your negative results. 

Biochemia medica , 27(3):447–452, 2017. K. R. Moffat, W. Shi, P. Cannon, and F. Sulli-van. Factors associated with recruitment to randomised controlled trials in general prac-tice: a systematic mixed studies review. Trials ,24(1):90, 2023. B. Mons, C. Neylon, J. Velterop, M. Dumontier, L. O. B. da Silva Santos, and M. D. Wilkinson. Cloudy, increasingly fair; revisiting the fair data guiding principles for the european open sci-ence cloud. Information Services and Use , 37 (1):49–56, 2017. L. d. Moura and S. Ullrich. The lean 4 theorem prover and programming language. In Inter-national Conference on Automated Deduction ,pages 625–635. Springer, 2021. C. A. Mouton, C. Lucas, and E. Guest. The opera-tional risks of ai in large-scale biological attacks: A red-team approach, 2023. C. A. Mouton, C. Lucas, and E. Guest. The opera-tional risks of ai in large-scale biological attacks. Technical report, RAND Corporation, 2024. L. Mui, M. Mohtashemi, and A. Halberstadt. No-tions of reputation in multi-agents systems: a review. In Proceedings of the first international joint conference on Autonomous agents and mul-tiagent systems: part 1 , pages 280–287, 2002. H. Murayama, S. Asai, K. Heeger, A. Ballar-ino, T. Bose, K. Cranmer, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, S. Demers, C. Geddes, Y. Gershtein, B. Heine-mann, J. Hewett, P. Huber, K. Mahn, R. Man-delbaum, J. Maricic, P. Merkel, C. Mona-han, P. Onyisi, M. Palmer, T. Raubenheimer, M. Sanchez, R. Schnee, S. Seidel, S.-H. Seo, J. Thaler, C. Touramanis, A. Vieregg, A. We-instein, L. Winslow, T.-T. Yu, and R. Zwaska. Exploring the quantum universe: Pathways to innovation and discovery in particle physics, 2023. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2172/ 2368847 .P. Murray-Rust. Open data in science. Nature Precedings , pages 1–1, 2008. M. Naddaf. Ai is transforming peer review—and many scientists are worried. Nature , 639 (8056):852–854, 2025. M. R. Nair and T. Roy. Role of artificial intelligence in the design and discovery of next-generation battery electrolytes. Chemical Physics Reviews ,6(1), 2025. A. Narayanan and S. Kapoor. Ai as normal tech-nology. Knight First Amendment Institute , 25, 2025. A. Navia-Vázquez, J. Cid-Sueiro, and M. A. Vázquez. “a priori” shapley data value esti-mation. Pattern Analysis and Applications , 28 (2):77, 2025. R. R. Nelson. The simple economics of basic sci-entific research. Journal of political economy ,67(3):297–306, 1959. R. Ngo, L. Chan, and S. Mindermann. The align-ment problem from a deep learning perspective. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00626 , 2022. T. Nguyen, A. Koneru, S. Li, and A. Grover. Physix: A foundation model for physics simulations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.17774 , 2025. 

> 47 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

J. Ning, X. Li, S. Zhong, J. Zeng, and G. Ke. Auto research for materials: Auditable ai-scientist workflows with held-out transfer, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.17100 .B. A. Nosek and Y. Bar-Anan. Scientific utopia: I. opening scientific communication. Psychologi-cal Inquiry , 23(3):217–243, 2012. B. A. Nosek, G. Alter, G. C. Banks, D. Borsboom, S. D. Bowman, S. J. Breckler, S. Buck, C. D. Chambers, G. Chin, G. Christensen, et al. Pro-moting an open research culture. Science , 348 (6242):1422–1425, 2015. A. Novikov, N. V˜ u, M. Eisenberger, E. Dupont, P.-S. Huang, A. Z. Wagner, S. Shirobokov, B. Ko-zlovskii, F. J. R. Ruiz, A. Mehrabian, M. P. Kumar, A. See, S. Chaudhuri, G. Holland, A. Davies, S. Nowozin, P. Kohli, and M. Ba-log. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scien-tific and algorithmic discovery, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131 .N. A. of Sciences, Medicine, Policy, G. Affairs, B. on Research Data, Information, and C. on To-ward an Open Science Enterprise. Open science by design: Realizing a vision for 21st century research, 2018. A. R. Oganov, C. J. Pickard, Q. Zhu, and R. J. Needs. Structure prediction drives materials discovery. Nature Reviews Materials , 4(5):331– 348, 2019. OpenAI. Finite Time Blowup for Navier Stokes, 2026a. URL 

## https://cdn.openai.com/pdf/ 32d9f210-8b73-45e0-91bc-82a30aef8a9a/ navier-stokes.pdf . Accessed: 10 Septem-ber 2026. OpenAI. Ten advances in mathematics and theoretical computer science, 2026b. URL https://cdn.openai.com/pdf/ ten-proofs-oai.pdf .W. H. Organization. Investing to overcome the global impact of neglected tropical diseases: third WHO report on neglected tropical diseases 2015 ,volume 3. World Health Organization, 2015. W. H. Organization et al. Working to overcome the global impact of neglected tropical diseases: first WHO report on neglected tropical diseases .World Health Organization, 2010. C. Ortlepp. Introducing the IP-NFT V2. Molecule Blog, December 2022. URL https://molecule.xyz/blog/ introducing-ip-nft-v2 .P. Pallmann, A. W. Bedding, B. Choodari-Oskooei, M. Dimairo, L. Flight, L. V. Hampson, J. Holmes, A. P. Mander, L. Odondi, M. R. Sydes, et al. Adaptive designs in clinical trials: why use them, and how to run and report them. BMC medicine , 16(1):29, 2018. G. K. Palshikar and M. M. Apte. Collusion set detection using graph clustering. Data min-ing and knowledge Discovery , 16(2):135–164, 2008. J. Pannu, D. Bloomfield, R. MacKnight, M. S. Hanke, A. Zhu, G. Gomes, A. Cicero, and T. V. Inglesby. Dual-use capabilities of concern of bi-ological ai models. PLoS computational biology ,21(5):e1012975, 2025. M. Parashar, T. DeBlanc-Knowles, E. Gianchan-dani, and L. E. Parker. Strengthening and de-mocratizing artificial intelligence research and development. Computer , 56(11):85–90, 2023. D. Park, S. Li, Y. Huang, X. Luo, H. Yu, Y. Go, C. Pinkenburg, Y. Lin, S. Yoo, J. Osborn, J. Huang, and Y. Ren. Fm4npp: A scaling foun-dation model for nuclear and particle physics, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508. 14087 .M. Park, E. Leahey, and R. J. Funk. Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over time. 

Nature , 613(7942):138–144, 2023. L. Parker, F. Lanusse, S. Golkar, L. Sarra, M. Cran-mer, A. Bietti, M. Eickenberg, G. Krawezik, M. McCabe, R. Morel, et al. Astroclip: a cross-modal foundation model for galaxies. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , 531 (4):4990–5011, 2024. D. Partha and P. A. David. Toward a new eco-nomics of science. Research policy , 23(5):487– 521, 1994. 

> 48 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

O. PBC and V. Buterin. Retroactive pub-lic goods funding, 2021. URL https: //medium.com/ethereum-optimism/ retroactive-public-goods-funding-33c9b7d00f0c .J. Pearl. The book of why: The new science of cause and effect . Basic Books, 2018. J. Peccoud, J. E. Gallegos, R. Murch, W. G. Buch-holz, and S. Raman. Cyberbiosecurity: from naive trust to risk awareness. Trends in biotech-nology , 36(1):4–7, 2018. E. Perez, S. Huang, F. Song, T. Cai, R. Ring, J. Aslanides, A. Glaese, N. McAleese, and G. Irv-ing. Red teaming language models with lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3419–3448, 2022. J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Scholkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations and learning algorithms . MIT press, 2017. P. G. Picht, V. Brunner, and R. Schmid. Artificial intelligence and intellectual property law: from diagnosis to action, 2022. I. Pinyol and J. Sabater-Mir. Computational trust and reputation models for open multi-agent systems: a review. Artificial Intelligence Review ,40(1):1–25, 2013. G. Poesia, D. Broman, N. Haber, and N. Goodman. Learning formal mathematics from intrinsic motivation. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 43032–43057. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-1362. URL https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/ 4b8001fc75f0532827472ea5a16af9ca-Paper-Conference. pdf .E. Posner and E. Weyl. Radical markets: Uproot-ing capitalism and democracy for a just society .Princeton University Press, 2018. I. Posner, A. Lei, and B. Schölkopf. From observa-tion to insight: Mechanistic world models and the quest for autonomous discovery, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.12474 .D. Pratt. Symposium: Trust via auditable records for communities of ai scientist agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608. 19511 .I. Price, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, F. Alet, T. R. Ander-sson, A. El-Kadi, D. Masters, T. Ewalds, J. Stott, S. Mohamed, P. Battaglia, et al. Probabilistic weather forecasting with machine learning. Na-ture , 637(8044):84–90, 2025. S. L. Price. Predicting crystal structures of organic compounds. Chemical Society Reviews , 43(7): 2098–2111, 2014. W. N. Price and I. G. Cohen. Privacy in the age of medical big data. Nature Medicine , 25(1): 37–43, 2019. G. L. Priest. The invention of enterprise liability: A critical history of the intellectual foundations of modern tort law. The Journal of Legal Studies ,14(3):461–527, 1985. P. Rajpurkar, E. Chen, O. Banerjee, and E. J. Topol. Ai in health and medicine. Nature Medicine , 28 (1):31–38, 2022. S. Rajtmajer, C. Griffin, J. Wu, R. Fraleigh, L. Bal-aji, A. Squicciarini, A. Kwasnica, D. Pennock, M. McLaughlin, T. Fritton, et al. A synthetic prediction market for estimating confidence in published work. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages 13218–13220, 2022. A. S. Ramesh, S. Vigneshwar, S. Vickram, S. Manikandan, R. Subbaiya, N. Karmegam, and W. Kim. Artificial intelligence driven hy-drogen and battery technologies–a review. Fuel ,337:126862, 2023. R. A. Rasheed, S. Banerjee, A. Mukherjee, and R. Hazra. From fluent to verifiable: Claim-level auditability for deep research agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13855 , 2026. I. Rauluseviciute, R. Riudavets-Puig, R. Blanc-Mathieu, J. A. Castro-Mondragon, K. Ferenc, V. Kumar, R. B. Lemma, J. Lucas, J. Chèneby, 

> 49 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

D. Baranasic, et al. Jaspar 2024: 20th anniver-sary of the open-access database of transcrip-tion factor binding profiles. Nucleic acids re-search , 52(D1):D174–D182, 2024. J. Ravenscroft, M. Liakata, A. Clare, and D. Duma. Measuring scientific impact beyond academia: An assessment of existing impact metrics and proposed improvements. PloS one , 12(3): e0173152, 2017. G. K. Reder, A. H. Gower, F. Kronström, R. Halle, V. Mahamuni, A. Patel, H. Hayatnagarkar, L. N. Soldatova, and R. D. King. Genesis-db: adatabase for autonomous laboratory systems. 

Bioinformatics Advances , 3(1):vbad102, 2023. S. Redyuk. Automated documentation of end-to-end experiments in data science. In 2019 IEEE 35th International Conference on Data Engineer-ing (ICDE) , pages 2076–2080. IEEE, 2019. Z. Ren, R. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Pang, S. Ren, and J. Zhang. Evigraph: Evidence-guided au-tonomous research agents, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2608.04738 .D. B. Ridley, H. G. Grabowski, and J. L. Moe. De-veloping drugs for developing countries. Health Affairs , 25(2):313–324, 2006. N. Rieke, J. Hancox, W. Li, F. Milletari, H. R. Roth, S. Albarqouni, S. Bakas, M. N. Galtier, B. A. Landman, K. Maier-Hein, et al. The future of digital health with federated learning. NPJ digital medicine , 3(1):119, 2020. M. S. Ringel, J. W. Scannell, M. Baedeker, and U. Schulze. Breaking eroom’s law. Nat Rev Drug Discov , 19(12):833–834, 2020. M. Ríos-García, N. Alampara, C. Gupta, I. Mandal, S. Mannan, A. A. Aghajani, N. Krishnan, and K. M. Jablonka. Ai scientists produce results without reasoning scientifically. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.18805 , 2026. L. Rocher, J. M. Hendrickx, and Y.-A. De Montjoye. Estimating the success of re-identifications in incomplete datasets using generative models. 

Nature Communications , 10(1):3069, 2019. M. J. G. Rodríguez, V. Rodríguez-Montequín, P. Ballesteros-Pérez, P. E. Love, and R. Signor. Collusion detection in public procurement auc-tions with machine learning algorithms. Au-tomation in Construction , 133:104047, 2022. A. E. Roth. The economist as engineer: Game theory, experimentation, and computation as tools for design economics. Econometrica , 70 (4):1341–1378, 2002. J. Rothfuss, B. Sukhija, L. Treven, F. Dörfler, S. Coros, and A. Krause. Bridging the sim-to-real gap with bayesian inference, 2024. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.16644 .J. P. Ruger. Ethics and governance of global health inequalities. Journal of Epidemiology & Com-munity Health , 60(11):998–1002, 2006. A. Sabharwal, M. S. Patel, A. Carrano, M. Rot-man, W. Wierson, and S. C. Ekker. Vaas is a multi-layer hallucination reduction pipeline for ai-assisted science: Production validation and prospective benchmarking. medRxiv , pages 2026–03, 2026. S. Sahoo, A. Chadha, V. Jain, and D. Chaud-hary. Sahoo: Safeguarded alignment for high-order optimization objectives in recursive self-improvement, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2603.06333 .J. B. Sandbrink. Artificial intelligence and bi-ological misuse: Differentiating risks of lan-guage models and biological design tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13952 , 2023. G. Sastry, L. Heim, H. Belfield, M. Anderljung, M. Brundage, J. Hazell, C. O’keefe, G. K. Had-field, R. Ngo, K. Pilz, et al. Computing power and the governance of artificial intelligence. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08797 , 2024. J. W. Scannell, A. Blanckley, H. Boldon, and B. Warrington. Diagnosing the decline in phar-maceutical r&d efficiency. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery , 11(3):191–200, 2012. B. Schölkopf, F. Locatello, S. Bauer, N. R. Ke, N. Kalchbrenner, A. Goyal, and Y. Bengio. To-ward causal representation learning. Proceed-ings of the IEEE , 109(5):612–634, 2021. 

> 50 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

E. Schultes, B. Magagna, T. Kuhn, M. Suchánek, L. B. da Silva Santos, and B. Mons. The com-parative anatomy of nanopublications and fair digital objects. Research ideas and outcomes , 8: e94150, 2022. L. Schut, N. Tomasev, T. McGrath, D. Hassabis, U. Paquet, and B. Kim. Bridging the human-ai knowledge gap: Concept discovery and trans-fer in alphazero, 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2310.16410 .G. Schweiger, A. Barnett, P. van den Besselaar, L. Bornmann, A. De Block, J. P. Ioannidis, U. Sandström, and S. Conix. The costs of com-petition in distributing scarce research funds. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,121(50):e2407644121, 2024. E. Seger, N. Dreksler, R. Moulange, E. Dardaman, J. Schuett, K. Wei, C. Winter, M. Arnold, S. Ó. hÉigeartaigh, A. Korinek, et al. Open-sourcing highly capable foundation models: An evalu-ation of risks, benefits, and alternative meth-ods for pursuing open-source objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09227 , 2023. M. Seifrid, R. Pollice, A. Aguilar-Granda, Z. Mor-gan Chan, K. Hotta, C. T. Ser, J. Vestfrid, T. C. Wu, and A. Aspuru-Guzik. Autonomous chemi-cal experiments: Challenges and perspectives on establishing a self-driving lab. Accounts of Chemical Research , 55(17):2454–2466, 2022. N. Selvadurai. Inventions without inventors: The need to recognize ai systems as inventors. Case W. Res. JL Tech. & Internet , 16:37, 2025. A. Sertkaya, H.-H. Wong, A. Jessup, and T. Beleche. Key cost drivers of pharmaceuti-cal clinical trials in the united states. Clinical Trials , 13(2):117–126, 2016. J. Shendure, S. Balasubramanian, G. M. Church, W. Gilbert, J. Rogers, J. A. Schloss, and R. H. Waterston. Dna sequencing at 40: past, present and future. Nature , 550(7676):345–353, 2017. A. Shenoy, G. Shenoy, and G. Shenoy. Respondeat superior in medicine and public health practice: the question is–who is accountable for whom? 

Ethics, Medicine and Public Health , 17:100634, 2021. T. Shevlane. Structured access: an emerging paradigm for safe ai deployment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05159 , 2022. M. Shilina. Leveraging token economies for public goods. In The Impact of Blockchain in Token Economies , pages 291–322. IGI Global Scientific Publishing, 2026. C. Si, T. Hashimoto, and D. Yang. The ideation-execution gap: Execution outcomes of llm-generated versus human research ideas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20803 , 2025. J. Skalse, N. Howe, D. Krasheninnikov, and D. Krueger. Defining and characterizing re-ward gaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:9460–9471, 2022. T. Skordas. Toward a european exascale ecosys-tem: the eurohpc joint undertaking. Communi-cations of the ACM , 62(4):70–70, 2019. T. M. Smith, T. R. Karl, and R. W. Reynolds. How accurate are climate simulations? Science , 296 (5567):483–484, 2002. E. H. Soice, R. Rocha, K. Cordova, M. Specter, and K. M. Esvelt. Can large language models democratize access to dual-use biotechnology? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03809 , 2023. S. Soiland-Reyes, P. Sefton, M. Crosas, L. J. Cas-tro, F. Coppens, J. M. Fernández, D. Garijo, B. Grüning, M. La Rosa, S. Leo, et al. Pack-aging research artefacts with ro-crate. Data Science , 5(2):97–138, 2022. K. Sridharan and G. Sivaramakrishnan. Assess-ing the decision-making capabilities of artificial intelligence platforms as institutional review board members. Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics , 19(3):83–91, 2024. G. Starace, O. Jaffe, D. Sherburn, J. Aung, J. S. Chan, L. Maksin, R. Dias, E. Mays, B. Kinsella, W. Thompson, et al. Paperbench: Evaluat-ing ai’s ability to replicate ai research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01848 , 2025. P. Stephan. How economics shapes science . Harvard University Press, 2015. 

> 51 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

J. M. Stokes, K. Yang, K. Swanson, W. Jin, A. Cubillos-Ruiz, N. M. Donghia, C. R. MacNair, S. French, L. A. Carfrae, Z. Bloom-Ackermann, et al. A deep learning approach to antibiotic discovery. Cell , 180(4):688–702, 2020. R. J. Strijkers, R. Cushing, D. Vasyunin, C. de Laat, A. Belloum, R. J. Meijer, et al. Toward exe-cutable scientific publications. In ICCS , pages 707–715, 2011. Y. Suchikova, N. Tsybuliak, J. A. Teixeira da Silva, and S. Nazarovets. Gaidet (generative ai del-egation taxonomy): A taxonomy for humans to delegate tasks to generative artificial intelli-gence in scientific research and publishing. Ac-countability in Research , 33(3):2544331, 2026. E. Sullivan. Understanding from machine learn-ing models. The British Journal for the Philoso-phy of Science , 2022. Y. Sun, L. Wang, G. Li, W. Lin, and L. Wang. A foundation model for enhancing magnetic resonance images and downstream segmenta-tion, registration and diagnostic tasks. Nature Biomedical Engineering , 9(4):521–538, 2025. C. Szabo. Unreliable: bias, fraud, and the reproducibility crisis in biomedical research .Columbia University Press, 2025. N. J. Szymanski, B. Rendy, Y. Fei, R. E. Kumar, T. He, D. Milsted, M. J. McDermott, M. Gallant, E. D. Cubuk, A. Merchant, et al. An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inor-ganic materials. Nature , 624(7990):86, 2023. A. Taeihagh. Governance of artificial intelligence. 

Policy and society , 40(2):137–157, 2021. G. Tamburrini. The ai carbon footprint and re-sponsibilities of ai scientists. Philosophies , 7(1): 4, 2022. J. Tang, L. Xia, Z. Li, and C. Huang. Ai-researcher: Autonomous scientific innovation, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18705 .S. Tang, A. Ghorbani, R. Yamashita, S. Rehman, J. A. Dunnmon, J. Zou, and D. L. Rubin. Data valuation for medical imaging using shapley value and application to a large-scale chest x-ray dataset. Scientific reports , 11(1):8366, 2021. T. Tao. Mathematics in the age of ai, 2026. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.16753 .S. Tayouri, V. Kogan, J. Beal, T. Levy, D. Farbiash, K. Flyangolts, S. T. Murphy, T. Mitchell, B. Rot-blat, I. Vaksler-Lublinsky, et al. Defending syn-thetic dna orders against splitting-based obfus-cation. bioRxiv , pages 2025–03, 2025. M. Tian, L. Gao, S. D. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Fan, X. Guo, R. Haas, P. Ji, K. Krongchon, Y. Li, et al. Scicode: A research coding benchmark curated by scientists. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:30624–30650, 2024. Y. Tian, Y. Ding, S. Fu, and D. Liu. Data boundary and data pricing based on the shapley value. 

IEEE Access , 10:14288–14300, 2022. E. Toledo, K. Hambardzumyan, M. Josifoski, R. Hazra, N. Baldwin, A. Audran-Reiss, M. Kuchnik, D. Magka, M. Jiang, A. M. Lupidi, et al. Ai research agents for machine learn-ing: Search, exploration, and generalization in mle-bench. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02554 ,2025. G. Tom, S. P. Schmid, S. G. Baird, Y. Cao, K. Darvish, H. Hao, S. Lo, S. Pablo-García, E. M. Rajaonson, M. Skreta, et al. Self-driving lab-oratories for chemistry and materials science. 

Chemical Reviews , 124(16):9633–9732, 2024. N. Tomasev, M. Franklin, J. Z. Leibo, J. Jacobs, W. A. Cunningham, I. Gabriel, and S. Osindero. Virtual agent economies, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2509.10147 .N. Tomašev, M. Franklin, and S. Osindero. In-telligent ai delegation, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2602.11865 .M. Topaz, N. Roguin, P. Gupta, Z. Zhang, and L.-M. Peltonen. Fabricated citations: an au-dit across 2· 5 million biomedical papers. The Lancet , 407(10541):1779–1781, 2026. C. S. Traberg, J. Roozenbeek, and S. van der Lin-den. Ai is turning research into a scientific monoculture. Communications Psychology , 4 (1):37, 2026. 

> 52 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

J. O. Tresansky. Phosita-the ubiquitous and enig-matic person in patent law. J. Pat. & Trademark Off. Soc’y , 73:37, 1991. P. Trouiller, P. Olliaro, E. Torreele, J. Orbinski, R. Laing, and N. Ford. Drug development for neglected diseases: a deficient market and a public-health policy failure. The Lancet , 359 (9324):2188–2194, 2002. D. Truhn, J. S. Reis-Filho, and J. N. Kather. Large language models should be used as scientific reasoning engines, not knowledge databases. 

Nature Medicine , 29(12):2983–2984, 2023. P. F. Uhlir and P. Schröder. Open data for global science. Data Science Journal , 6:OD36–OD53, 2007. F. Urbina, F. Lentzos, C. Invernizzi, and S. Ekins. Dual use of artificial-intelligence-powered drug discovery. Nature Machine Intelligence , 4(3): 189–191, 2022. U.S. Senate. Biosecurity modernization and inno-vation act of 2026, S. 3741. 119th Cong., 2026. URL https://www.congress.gov/bill/ 119th-congress/senate-bill/3741 .R. Van Loo. The revival of respondeat superior and evolution of gatekeeper liability. Geo. lJ ,109:141, 2020. R. Van Noorden and J. M. Perkel. Ai and sci-ence: what 1,600 researchers think. Nature ,621(7980):672–675, 2023. M. Varadi, S. Anyango, M. Deshpande, S. Nair, C. Natassia, G. Yordanova, D. Yuan, O. Stroe, G. Wood, A. Laydon, et al. Alphafold protein structure database: massively expanding the structural coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nucleic acids re-search , 50(D1):D439–D444, 2022. M. Varadi, D. Bertoni, P. Magana, U. Paramval, I. Pidruchna, M. Radhakrishnan, M. Tsenkov, S. Nair, M. Mirdita, J. Yeo, et al. Alphafold protein structure database in 2024: providing structure coverage for over 214 million pro-tein sequences. Nucleic acids research , 52(D1): D368–D375, 2024. C. Vidal and M. Monperrus. Aicid: Unique iden-tifiers for ai scientists, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2606.28756 .R. L. Vogt, P. R. Heck, R. M. Mestechkin, P. Hey-dari, C. F. Chabris, and M. N. Meyer. Aversion to pragmatic randomised controlled trials: three survey experiments with clinicians and laypeo-ple in the usa. BMJ open , 14(9):e084699, 2024. W. H. Walters and E. I. Wilder. Fabrication and errors in the bibliographic citations generated by chatgpt. Scientific Reports , 13(1):14045, 2023. H. Wang, T. Fu, Y. Du, W. Gao, K. Huang, Z. Liu, P. Chandak, S. Liu, P. Van Katwyk, A. Deac, et al. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature , 620(7972):47–60, 2023. J. T. Wang and R. Jia. Data banzhaf: A robust data valuation framework for machine learning. In 

International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 6388–6421. PMLR, 2023. X. Wang, N. He, Z. Zhou, J. Chen, A. Mateen, Y. Shao, X. Chen, C. Liu, A. Mujear, J. Zhang, et al. Ai-driven exploration and design of in-organic battery materials. Renewable and Sus-tainable Energy Reviews , 229:116633, 2026. M. Webb. The impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market. Available at SSRN 3482150 ,2019. J. Wei, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Zhuang, Z. Gao, D. Zhou, G. Wang, Z. Gao, J. Cao, Z. Qiu, M. Hu, C. Ma, S. Tang, J. He, C. Song, X. He, Q. Zhang, C. You, S. Zheng, N. Ding, W. Ouyang, N. Dong, Y. Cheng, S. Sun, L. Bai, and B. Zhou. From ai for science to agentic science: A survey on autonomous scientific discovery, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14111 .L. Weidener and C. Spreckelsen. Decentralized science (desci): definition, shared values, and guiding principles. Frontiers in Blockchain , 7: 1375763, 2024. M. L. Weitzman. Recombinant growth. The quar-terly journal of economics , 113(2):331–360, 1998. 

> 53 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

D. G. Widder, S. West, and M. Whittaker. Open (for business): Big tech, concentrated power, and the political economy of open ai. Nature ,2023. S. R. Wilkinson, M. Aloqalaa, K. Belhajjame, M. R. Crusoe, B. de Paula Kinoshita, L. Gadelha, D. Garijo, O. J. R. Gustafsson, N. Juty, S. Kanwal, et al. Applying the fair principles to computa-tional workflows. Scientific data , 12(1):328, 2025. E. Wójcik-Gront, B. Zieniuk, and M. Pawełkowicz. Harnessing ai-powered genomic research for sustainable crop improvement. Agriculture , 14 (12):2299, 2024. S. M. Woodley and R. Catlow. Crystal structure prediction from first principles. Nature Materi-als , 7(12):937–946, 2008. O. J. Wouters, M. McKee, and J. Luyten. Estimated research and development investment needed to bring a new medicine to market, 2009-2018. 

Jama , 323(9):844–853, 2020. C.-J. Wu, R. Raghavendra, U. Gupta, B. Acun, N. Ardalani, K. Maeng, G. Chang, F. Aga, J. Huang, C. Bai, et al. Sustainable ai: En-vironmental implications, challenges and op-portunities. Proceedings of machine learning and systems , 4:795–813, 2022. S. Wu, Y. Liu, M. Ruan, S. Chen, and X.-Y. Xie. Human-generative ai collaboration enhances task performance but undermines human’s in-trinsic motivation. Scientific Reports , 15(1): 15105, 2025a. Y. Wu, C. Tian, J. Li, H. Sun, K. Tam, Z. Zhou, H. Liao, J. Xiong, Z. Guo, L. Li, et al. A survey on federated fine-tuning of large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12016 , 2025b. Y. Xu, X. Liu, X. Cao, C. Huang, E. Liu, S. Qian, X. Liu, Y. Wu, F. Dong, C.-W. Qiu, et al. Artificial intelligence: A powerful paradigm for scientific research. The innovation , 2(4), 2021. Y. Yamada, R. T. Lange, C. Lu, S. Hu, C. Lu, J. Fo-erster, J. Clune, and D. Ha. The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated scientific dis-covery via agentic tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066 , 2025. R. V. Yampolskiy. Artificial superintelligence: a futuristic approach . CRC Press, 2015. G. Yan, S. Li, P. Ma, Q. Zhang, P. Ma, J. Wang, M.-H. Hsieh, and Y. Du. Omniqec: discovering practical quantum error-correcting codes by an ai scientist, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2607.25865 .Y. Yan, S. Wang, J. Huo, J. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Hu, P. S. Yu, C. Gomes, B. Selman, and Q. Wen. Position: Multimodal large language models can significantly advance scientific reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02871 , 2025. J.-C. Ye, Y.-W. Lai, X.-H. Huang, Z.-X. Chang, Y.-H. Chung, and C.-M. Shu. Development of the electrolyte in lithium-ion battery: a con-cise review on its thermal hazards. Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry , 149(19): 11293–11312, 2024. C. Yencha. The entrepreneurial state: Debunking public vs. private sector myths, 2015. X. Yin, X. Wang, L. Pan, L. Lin, X. Wan, and W. Y. Wang. Gödel agent: A self-referential agent framework for recursively self-improvement. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 27890–27913, 2025. H. Ying, Z. Wu, Y. Geng, J. Wang, D. Lin, and K. Chen. Lean workbook: A large-scale lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:105848–105863, 2024. J. Yoon, S. Arik, and T. Pfister. Data valuation using reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10842– 10851. PMLR, 2020. T. Zahavy. Position: LLMs can’t jump. In 

Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning Position Paper Track , 2026. URL 

## https://openreview.net/forum?id= klU4737opt .H. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, and N. Li. Machine learning methods for weather forecasting: A survey. Atmosphere , 16(1):82, 2025a. 

> 54 Agentic Economies for Autonomous Scientific Discovery

L. Zhang, C. Jiao, B. Li, and C. Xiong. Fairshare data pricing via data valuation for large lan-guage models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:33306–33345, 2026. S. Zhang, Y. Xu, N. Usuyama, H. Xu, J. Bagga, R. Tinn, S. Preston, R. Rao, M. Wei, N. Valluri, et al. Biomedclip: a multimodal biomedical foundation model pretrained from fifteen mil-lion scientific image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915 , 2023. Z. Zhang, S. Chakraborty, A. S. Bedi, E. Mathew, V. Saravanan, L. Cong, A. Velasquez, S. Lin-Gibson, M. Blewett, D. Hendrycs, et al. Gen-erative ai for biosciences: Emerging threats and roadmap to biosecurity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15975 , 2025b. C. Zhao, S. Zhao, M. Zhao, Z. Chen, C.-Z. Gao, H. Li, and Y.-a. Tan. Secure multi-party com-putation: theory, practice and applications. In-formation Sciences , 476:357–372, 2019. M. Zhao, J. Dong, K. Xu, Z. Hasan, C. Fan, S. Jiang, S. Mao, Y. Ling, L. Zou, T. Zhou, Y. H. Chan, W. Zhang, Z. Zhou, G. Huang, H. Li, W. Cun, Z. Chen, M. Yuan, and Y. Geng. Scienceflow: A long-horizon agent for ml research, scientific discovery and beyond, 2026. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2608.14354 .J. Zhu, R. Hou, X. Wang, W. Wang, J. Cao, B. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Ying, L. Zhang, et al. En-abling rack-scale confidential computing using heterogeneous trusted execution environment. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Pri-vacy (SP) , pages 1450–1465. IEEE, 2020. M. Zhu, Q. Xie, Y. Weng, J. Wu, Z. Lin, L. Yang, and Y. Zhang. Ai scientists fail without strong implementation capability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01372 , 2025.