Title: Large Discovery Models: Empirically-grounded Model-Based Open-Ended Search

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.15669v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:24:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 68

Markdown Content:
# Large Discovery Models: 

## Empirically-Grounded Model-Based Open-Ended Search 

Zhongwei Yu ∗26 Yan Song ∗16 Xue Yan ∗6 Anjie Liu ‡26 Xingyu Lu ‡26 

Yihang Chen ‡16 Huichi Zhou 16 Siyuan Guo 4 Luoyang Sun 36 

Sihan Chen 6 Xiangning Yu 56 Jun Wang 1† 

> 1

University College London  

> 2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (GZ) 3 Institute of Automation, CAS  

> 4

Jilin University 5 Tianjin University 6 AI Lab, The Yangtze River Delta 

> ∗

Equal contribution as co-first authors. ‡Equal contribution as co-second authors.  

> †

Corresponding author. jun.wang@ucl.ac.uk .

Abstract 

Scientific discovery often involves optimising expensive-to-evaluate objectives over vast, struc-tured, and open-ended hypothesis spaces, such as molecules, protein sequences, and computer programs. Generative models such as large language models (LLMs) provide expressive priors over such spaces, but their likelihoods and self-assessments are unreliable proxies for the objec-tives and calibrated epistemic uncertainty, especially for novel candidates outside the observed data distribution. We introduce the Large Discovery Model (LDM), an empirically grounded recurrent architecture that couples a generative model with a Bayesian non-parametric reward surrogate model. The generative model proposes and refines candidate designs, while the surro-gate predicts their performance and quantifies uncertainty, yielding an uncertainty-aware value that guides candidate generation, refinement, and selection. The discovery memory and the surrogate model are continually updated as each new experimental observation arrives. We evaluate LDM on three scenarios spanning different design modalities and objectives, including neural-network training, antibody design, and molecular optimisation. Compared to LLM-only reflection or traditional statistical search across these domains, LDM achieves a 2 .4× greater reduction in validation BPB, an 18 .2% relative decrease in binding energy, and more than 60% relative gains in molecular multi-objective performance. These results suggests that LDM could serve as a general-purpose discovery engine for effective search over open-ended hypothesis spaces. 

This paper serves as an initial release of LDM (v0.1), with code and benchmarks available at 

https: // github. com/ yzailab/ Large-Discovery-Models .Query  Solution  

> Test-Time Computing
> LLM Reasoning
> 2024-2026 · Can solve
> DeepSeek-R1
> Query Answer
> LLM Chat
> 2020-2024 · Can talk
> GPT-3.5
> Next-Token
> Prediction
> Auto-Regressive
> Token Generation
> ✔/
> Verifier
> LLM Discovery
> 2026 · Can design
> Large Discovery Models
> (This Work)
> Query
> Design Space
> Design
> Discovery
> Observation
> Experiment
> LDM
> OpenAI-o1

Figure 1: From generation and reasoning to open-ended discovery. LLM generation pro-duces responses through autoregressive prediction. LLM reasoning adds inference-time compu-tation (e.g., chain-of-thought, tree search, or best-of-N ) with a cheap verifier to select solutions (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2024; Wang et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI, 2025). Large Discovery Models augment LLMs with an empirically grounded signal that guides exploration and discov-ery, enabling search in open-ended scientific domains under expensive black-box evaluation. 1arXiv:2608.15669v1 [cs.LG] 16 Aug 2026 1 Introduction 

The development of large language models (LLMs) has progressed from open-ended generation towards increasingly capable forms of reasoning. Pretraining provides broad linguistic and con-ceptual knowledge, while inference-time scaling allows a model to generate, compare, and refine multiple candidate solutions. This approach has produced substantial gains in mathematics, coding, theorem proving, and game playing, where solutions may be difficult to find but com-paratively easy to evaluate. Formal derivations can be assessed by process or outcome verifiers, programs can be executed against unit tests, and game strategies can be evaluated using exact rules or simulators (Yao et al., 2023a; Madaan et al., 2023; Snell et al., 2025). AlphaZero-like methods make this feedback loop explicit by combining generation, evaluation, and search (Sil-ver et al., 2017; Feng et al., 2024b). OpenR (Wang et al., 2024) provides an open framework for studying such reasoning systems, while AlphaEvolve (Novikov et al., 2025) couples language-model proposals with automated evaluators at scale. Together, these developments demonstrate that inference-time computation is particularly effective when reliable and repeatable feedback can turn generation into directed search. Scientific discovery poses a more challenging setting. The candidate space may be vast, struc-tured, and only partially specified, while feedback often depends on expensive simulation, accel-erator experiments, physical assays, or real-world experiment. Evaluations cannot be repeated freely, and the resulting feedback may be delayed or noisy. A discovery system must therefore decide not only which candidates to evaluate, but also which hypotheses and designs should enter the search process in the first place. Figure 1 illustrates this progression from generation and reasoning to discovery. Acceptance  

> Verification
> Reflection & Refinement
> Hypothesis
> Space Discovery
> Experiment
> Observation
> Belief
> Design/Hypothesis

Figure 2: The empirical scientific discovery loop. An agent generates candidate hypothe-ses or designs, selects a subset for costly evaluation, observes the outcomes, and uses those observations to update its beliefs and guide the next round of search, as described in Defini-tion 1. 

Definition 1 (Empirical Scientific Discovery) . Scientific discovery, in the setting considered here, is a sequential process in which an agent generates hypotheses or designs, selects a limited number for evaluation through interaction with an external evaluator, and uses the resulting empirical observations to update its beliefs and guide subsequent search. A discovery occurs when this process identifies a previously unknown and non-trivial relationship, mechanism, or design that is supported by empirical evidence. 1 

> 1This is an operational definition of empirically grounded, search-based scientific discovery: the class of scientific problems that can be formulated as sequential search over hypotheses or designs, with selected candidates evaluated through physical experiments, simulations, computational tests, or other external sources of evidence.

2Definition 1 highlights two differences between scientific discovery and reasoning with cheap verifiers. First, scientific search is often open-ended : relevant candidates may lie outside the region represented by the current model or reachable through its existing search operators. Second, empirical feedback is budgeted : only a small fraction of the generated candidates can be evaluated. The agent must therefore learn from limited observations, model an unknown objective, and allocate its experimental budget to candidates that are expected to be useful or informative (Shahriari et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018). Current LLM-based research systems address only part of this problem. Autonomous research agents can generate hypotheses, write code, execute experiments, analyse results, and produce scientific manuscripts (Lu et al., 2024). LLM-generated research proposals have also been judged more novel than proposals written by human experts (Si et al., 2024). However, these proposals exhibit limited diversity and weaker feasibility, and LLMs do not reliably evaluate their own ideas. End-to-end assessments similarly identify persistent limitations in experimental execution, novelty assessment, and methodological reasoning (Beel et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026; Starace et al., 2025). Thus, fluent generation and procedural automation do not by themselves provide the empirically grounded value signal needed for scientific discovery. This limitation also appears in scientific design. An LLM assigns high probability to candidates that are plausible under its learned distribution, but linguistic or sequence likelihood need not correlate with an externally measured scientific property (Gupta et al., 2025; Chang et al., 2025). LLM-only search can therefore produce valid candidates without reliably determining which ones merit expensive evaluation. Bayesian optimisation (BO) offers a complementary capability. Given a limited set of observations, BO learns a probabilistic surrogate of the unknown objective and uses an acquisition function to balance predicted performance against epistemic uncertainty (Jones et al., 1998; Srinivas et al., 2010; Shahriari et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018). It can therefore prioritise promising or informative experiments under a limited evaluation budget. However, BO still requires a representation of the design space and a mechanism for proposing or reaching candidates. In structured and combinatorial spaces, such as molecules, proteins, programs, and experimental protocols, optimising the acquisition function may itself be difficult (Balandat et al., 2020; Griffiths and Hern´ andez-Lobato, 2020). BO can efficiently rank the candidates exposed by its current representation and search operators, but it may fail to reveal valuable candidates outside that search support. These observations expose complementary limitations. LLMs can generate and modify struc-tured candidates, but lack a reliable estimate of their external scientific value. BO grounds candidate selection in empirical observations, but its effectiveness depends on which candidates its representation and search procedure can expose. Scientific discovery requires both capabil-ities: the search frontier must expand, and experimental resources must be allocated using an uncertainty-aware value signal that balances expected value with information gain. Thus, to combine the strength of both methods, in this paper, we formulate scientific discovery as sequential inverse design . Given a vast, structured, and potentially unbounded design space, an agent must repeatedly decide which candidate to evaluate next under a limited experimental budget. Because the reward function is unknown and the design space cannot be enumerated, it is generally infeasible to model rewards accurately over the entire space. The agent therefore maintains a probabilistic surrogate , learned from the candidates evaluated so far, that predicts both the reward of a candidate and the epistemic uncertainty of that prediction. An acquisition function converts these beliefs into an estimate of the value of evaluating or further investigating      

> It does not encompass all forms of scientific discovery, particularly those for which the relevant search space, evaluation procedure, or objective cannot yet be specified. Moreover, unknown and non-trivial are relational notions, defined relative to the agent’s prior knowledge and, where appropriate, the knowledge of the relevant scientific community. A result may therefore be a discovery for an agent while constituting a rediscovery from the community’s perspective.

3SCIENTIFIC DESIGN SPACE       

> Unknown unknowns
> Not yet represented
> Know nunknowns
> Represented but uncertain
> Discovery
> Known
> Knowns
> Exploration Known
> Unknowns
> Discovery
> Memory Unknown
> Unknowns
> Retrieval
> Unknown
> Knowns
> Known Unknown
> Known  Unknown
> Awareness
> Uncertainty
> (A) (B)
> Known knowns
> understood for eploitation
> Exploration

Figure 3: Epistemic regimes of experimental scientific search. (A) An adaptation of the Rumsfeld Matrix (Krogerus and Tsch¨ appeler, 2018), organised by search awareness and objective uncertainty. (B) A scientific agent moves among three regimes in the design space. each candidate, thereby balancing the exploitation of promising designs against the exploration of uncertain ones. This formulation highlights an important distinction between predictive uncertainty and search awareness . Predictive uncertainty concerns what the surrogate does not yet know about can-didates within its current modelling support and can be reduced by collecting informative ob-servations. Search awareness instead concerns which candidates, design families, or structural relationships are represented by, or reachable through, the proposal process. These two limita-tions give rise to three different modes of search. Exploitation prioritises reachable candidates with high predicted rewards. Exploration evaluates uncertain candidates within the existing search support to improve the surrogate. Discovery changes the support itself, exposing previ-ously unrepresented candidates, design families, or relationships that neither exploitation nor exploration could otherwise reach. Figure 3 illustrates this perspective by adapting the four epistemic regimes to scientific design. To realise this process, we introduce the Large Discovery Model (LDM), an empirically grounded recurrent architecture that couples an LLM proposal model with a continually updated proba-bilistic surrogate. At each round, the LLM generates, edits, and refines structured candidates, thereby constructing and reshaping a dynamic search frontier. The surrogate predicts the em-pirical rewards of these candidates and quantifies its epistemic uncertainty about them. An acquisition function then uses these predictions to decide where to allocate further candidate refinement, inference-time computation, and costly empirical evaluations. The resulting obser-vations are added to the data, updating the surrogate and producing new acquisition signals that redirect subsequent generation and search. The acquisition function is therefore not merely a post-generation filter. It provides an empiri-cally grounded value signal that governs the allocation of both computational and experimental resources. The LLM determines which structured candidates can be proposed and reached, while the surrogate and acquisition function determine which parts of this evolving frontier are most valuable to pursue. Through this recurrent interaction, LDM extends inference-time scaling beyond domains with cheap and repeatable verifiers to scientific-design problems in which feedback is costly, noisy, sparse, and available only through a limited number of empirical evaluations. The proposed LDM has a general discovery capability. To demonstrate this, we evaluate LDM in three diverse structured scientific-design domains: neural-network training-program search on AutoResearch (Karpathy, 2026), antibody CDRH3 sequence design, and multi-objective 4LLM-only baseline LDM (ours) 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 

> val_bpb reduction vs baseline (1.0069)
> 0.0301
> reaches 0.9767
> 255 experiments
> 0.0727
> reaches 0.9342
> 615 experiments
> 2.4 ×
> further

(a) Performance on AutoResearch. Pure LLM BO LDM (ours)   

> −110 −105 −100 −95 −90 −85
> Final best-so-far Δ G (lower is better)
> -91.1 ± 3.2 (n=5) -99.5 ± 4.8 (n=10) -104.7 ± 1.0 (n=5)
> Antibody design on 1NSN_S

(b) Performance on antibody design. 

Figure 4: Complementary limitations of LLM-only and BO-based search. (a) LDM improves upon the LLM-only AutoResearch baseline under the same H100 hardware setting. 

(b) Final best-so-far binding energy on the antibody-design task, where LDM outperforms the LLM-only and BO-only baselines. Lower binding energy is better. For details, we refer to § 6. molecular optimisation. LDM exceeds the best previously reported AutoResearch result. With a weak language-model prior, it remains competitive with AntBO (Khan et al., 2022), a specialised BO method for antibody design. It also achieves substantial improvements over both LLM-only and BO-only baselines in multi-objective molecular design. On AutoResearch, LDM achieves an approximately 2 .4× larger absolute validation-BPB reduction than LLM-only reflection from a common starting point. On antibody design, it achieves an 18 .2% lower mean binding energy than LLM-only reflection after 200 evaluation steps. On molecular optimisation, it improves the hypervolume of the Pareto front by 62 .4% over LLM-only reflection and by 63 .1% over classical Bayesian optimisation. Figure 4 presents selected results, with the full experimental evaluation deferred to § 6. Our contributions are fourfold. First, we formulate scientific discovery as inference-time search over a dynamic, structured design space, guided by an uncertainty-aware value model grounded in empirical observations. Second, we introduce an acquisition-tilted search policy that combines the structured prior of an LLM with inference-time computation and sequential experimental feedback. Third, we provide a regret analysis that separates surrogate-model error from the suboptimality of the LLM-based search process. Finally, we demonstrate the framework across three classes of scientific objects: computer programs, biological sequences, and molecules. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. § 2 continues the discussion about the search and discovery in open-ended space. § 3 derives the LDM formulation and its acquisition-tilted search method. § 4 presents the practical algorithm. § 5 provides the regret analysis. Finally, 

§ 6 reports the empirical results. 

## 2 Search and Discovery in Open-Ended Design Spaces 

In this work, discovery takes place in an open-ended hypothesis space , rather than over a fixed and fully enumerated input domain. We seek a design or hypothesis x with high unknown reward 

R(x), ideally approaching x⋆ ∈ arg max x∈X R(x), where X denotes the evolving universe of hypotheses that may become expressible during search. The agent initially has access only to a reachable subset X0 ⊂ X and must expand or reshape this subset by generating new candidates, representations, and design families. The challenge is therefore twofold: evaluating R is costly, black-box, and potentially noisy, while the relevant search space is itself not fully specified in 5advance but must be progressively constructed through the discovery process. This differs from classical numerical optimisation or combinatorial search, which generally as-sumes a fixed and explicitly specified domain together with a gradient, numerical oracle, or known set of valid search operations. In scientific discovery, the full hypothesis space may not be enumerable, and the search may need to formulate hypotheses that lie beyond its current representation or reach. To reason about what is currently known, we introduce a probabilistic surrogate , i.e. a posterior 

p(R | D t) over the reward surface R conditioned on the dataset Dt = {(xi, r i)}t−1 

> i=1

of previ-ously evaluated designs and their noisy feedback ri ≈ R(xi). Its predictive belief is usually summarised by posterior moments ( μt(x), σ t(x)), representing the expected reward and predic-tive uncertainty on the surrogate’s modelling support. The surrogate therefore describes the search’s current empirical knowledge, but it does not by itself determine or enumerate the full hypothesis space. Using this surrogate-relative notion of knowledge, we partition X into four epistemic regimes, as illustrated in Figure 3. 

• Known knowns are evaluated designs whose rewards are sufficiently well understood. The surrogate predicts their values with low posterior uncertainty σt(x). 

• Known unknowns are designs that the search can formulate and the surrogate can model, but whose rewards remain unresolved. They are represented by high posterior uncertainty 

σt(x) and can be resolved through further evaluation. 

• Unknown knowns are designs or evaluation results that exist in an external source, such as a database, a previous experiment, or a parallel discovery process, but are absent from the current search context. They can become available only through an explicit retrieval operation. 

• Unknown unknowns are designs that lie beyond the search’s current effective reach. This can occur for two reasons: (i) X is too large, combinatorial, or effectively unbounded for the current search procedure to reach the design; or (ii) the design lies outside the surro-gate’s modelling support, so that ( μt(x), σ t(x)) does not constitute a meaningful calibrated prediction. These regimes distinguish uncertainty, reachability, modelling, and knowledge. A design does not become known merely because it belongs to a mathematically defined space; a reachable design is not necessarily supported by the surrogate; and information stored externally is not available unless it is retrieved into the current context. All four regimes may therefore persist throughout the search. The search frontier is the conceptual boundary of what the current procedure can effectively formulate, reach, and model. Designs inside this frontier are accessible to the search, although their rewards may remain uncertain. Designs outside it have not yet entered the modelled search process. This distinction gives rise to three operations closely related to Wang et al. (2008): 

• Exploitation acts on known knowns by selecting designs for which the surrogate predicts both high reward μt(x) and low uncertainty σt(x). 

• Exploration resolves known unknowns by evaluating reachable but uncertain designs. The resulting observations reduce posterior uncertainty and may turn known unknowns into known knowns. 

• Discovery expands the search frontier by formulating hypotheses that were previously out-side the search’s effective reach. This brings unknown unknowns into the modelled hypoth-esis space, where they become known unknowns that can subsequently be evaluated. 6Discovery is therefore not simply the evaluation of an untested design. An untested design that already lies within the surrogate’s modelling support is a known unknown and belongs to exploration. Discovery instead changes what the search can express, reach, or meaningfully model. Experimental evaluation then determines the value of the newly surfaced hypothesis. The three operations correspond to three transitions in Figure 3: discovery moves hypotheses from unknown unknowns to known unknowns, exploration moves them from known unknowns to known knowns, and exploitation operates within the known-known regime. The unknown-known regime requires separate memory read and write operations. We leave memory retrieval and federated discovery to future work and focus here on discovery, exploration, and exploitation within a single sequential search process. This formulation is conceptual and does not prescribe a particular discovery algorithm. The next section introduces the Large Discovery Model, which instantiates these operations by combining a generative foundation model, the probabilistic surrogate introduced above, and an acquisition-guided inference-time search policy. 

## 3 The Large Discovery Model 

We are now ready to define the Large Discovery Model (LDM). LDM is a policy for sequen-tial inverse design built from three interacting components: a generative foundation model, a probabilistic surrogate, and a model-based acquisition function. Same as before, at iteration t, Dt = {(xi, r i)}t−1 

> i=1

denotes the empirical evaluation history, where 

xi is a previously evaluated design and ri is its observed reward. We use Ct to denote the broader 

search context available to the generative model. This context may include Dt, previously generated candidates, surrogate predictions, acquisition values, constraint feedback, refinement trajectories, and other forms of search memory. Thus, Dt contains the empirical evidence used to fit the surrogate, whereas Ct contains the information used to condition candidate generation. For clarity, a compact list of notation is provided in Appendix A. 

(i) A generative foundation model. We denote by 

pθ,α (x | C t) (1) the proposal distribution over plausible designs conditioned on the current search context. Here, 

θ denotes the parameters of the underlying generative model, while α denotes its inference config-uration, such as the prompting strategy, sampling temperature, reasoning procedure, refinement scheme, or inference-time compute budget. Thus, pθ denotes a base model distribution, whereas 

pθ,α denotes the effective proposal after the chosen inference configuration has been applied. We use pθ,α throughout the paper to make explicit that the effective proposal distribution depends not only on the model parameters but also on how the model is used at inference time. The generative model supplies a structured prior over the design space X . It enables the search to generate candidates that reflect domain knowledge, semantic plausibility, and structural con-straints without requiring X to be explicitly enumerated. By changing its context or inference procedure, the model can also expand and reshape the set of candidates reachable by the current search. 

(ii) A probabilistic surrogate. As introduced in Section 2, the posterior p(R | D t) repre-sents the current belief about the unknown reward function, conditioned on the empirical ob-servations collected so far. For a candidate x, the predictive mean μt(x) estimates its expected reward, while the predictive uncertainty σt(x) quantifies the surrogate’s epistemic uncertainty 7about that estimate. High epistemic uncertainty indicates that the prediction is weakly sup-ported by the available evidence and may be reduced through additional informative evaluations. It is therefore distinct from irreducible randomness or measurement noise in the evaluation pro-cess. The surrogate provides the empirical grounding that the generative model alone generally lacks. Although a foundation model may encode substantial domain knowledge, its likelihoods and self-assessments do not necessarily provide calibrated estimates of a task-specific quantitative reward, particularly for novel candidates outside the observed data distribution. 

(iii) A model-based acquisition function. From the surrogate’s predictive distribution, we construct an acquisition function at(x) that assigns each candidate a scalar value to the sequen-tial search process. Depending on its form, the acquisition function may favour candidates with high predicted reward, candidates with high epistemic uncertainty, or a principled combination of the two. It therefore mediates the trade-off between exploitation and exploration. A central novelty of LDM is that it guides search with an acquisition value , rather than a conventional reward-model score. Whereas a reward model estimates the expected performance of a candidate, the acquisition function measures the decision value of allocating additional computation or costly empirical evaluation to it, accounting for both predicted reward and epistemic uncertainty. This signal therefore governs not only which candidates are selected for external evaluation, but also how inference-time computation is allocated across sampling, ranking, refinement, and branch expansion. Our ablation study in the late experiment section demonstrates the importance of this acquisition-guided mechanism relative to search based on predicted reward alone. These three components play complementary roles. The generative model proposes structured candidates and can move the search frontier towards designs not previously considered. The surrogate grounds the search in empirical observations and quantifies epistemic uncertainty. The acquisition function uses this predictive belief to determine which reachable candidates are most valuable to develop or evaluate. LDM thereby uses empirically calibrated feedback to direct the inference-time search of the generative model. We seek a search distribution that attains high expected acquisition value while remaining sufficiently close to the structured prior supplied by the generative model. Assume that X is a measurable space, with its σ-algebra omitted for simplicity. At iteration t, we define 

πt = arg max  

> q∈∆( X)



Ex∼q[at(x)] − 1

η KL( q ∥ pθ,α (· | C t)) 



, (2) where ∆( X ) denotes the set of probability measures over X , KL is the Kullback–Leibler diver-gence, and η > 0 controls the strength of acquisition-based tilting. The expected-acquisition term moves probability mass towards candidates that are valuable under the empirically grounded surrogate. The KL term prevents the search policy from departing arbitrarily far from the generative model’s prior over plausible and well-formed designs. The parameter η con-trols this trade-off: larger values place greater emphasis on acquisition value, whereas smaller values keep the search closer to the generative prior. The inference configuration α affects πt through pθ,α (· | C t) and therefore changes the reference distribution against which the KL divergence is measured. Increasing inference-time computa-tion may reshape this proposal distribution through additional sampling, reasoning, refinement, or structured search. The acquisition function then determines how that computation is allo-cated according to predicted empirical value and epistemic uncertainty. Equation (2) is deliberately model-agnostic: it does not depend on a particular generative architecture, probabilistic surrogate, or acquisition function. Its variational form follows the 8Gibbs variational principle and is closely related to Gibbs posteriors (Donsker and Varadhan, 1975; Bissiri et al., 2016), KL-regularised policy search (Peters et al., 2010), maximum-entropy reinforcement learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018), and control as probabilistic inference (Levine, 2018). Accordingly, our contribution is not the isolated generic KL-regularised objective. The distinctive role of Equation (2) in LDM is to connect a structured generative prior to an ac-quisition value derived from a continually updated empirical surrogate. This connection allows external observations to direct both inference-time computation and sequential evaluation over structured, potentially open-ended design spaces. As we shall show later, a crucial part of our method is to have the acquisition value updated in a non-parametric fashion with the Gaussian Process to make it sample-efficient on-policy learning (Ramos et al., 2023). The resulting policy is recurrent (see Fig 5). Candidates generated under the current search context are scored and refined using the surrogate-derived acquisition signal; selected candidates are then evaluated by an external empirical source; and the resulting observations update Dt,the surrogate, and the next search context Ct+1 . LDM therefore does not merely reweight a fixed set of generated samples. It repeatedly couples generation, empirical evaluation, belief updating, and search-frontier expansion. In the following sections, we first show that Equation (2) admits a closed-form acquisition-tilted policy. We then describe how this ideal policy can be approximated through inference-time sam-pling, selection, and iterative refinement, with particular attention to test-time compute scaling. We subsequently instantiate the probabilistic surrogate as a Gaussian process and construct at

from its posterior predictive distribution. Finally, we describe how the same acquisition signal can support parameter adaptation: in addition to directing inference through α, it may provide supervision for updating the generative parameters θ through fine-tuning. 

3.1 An Acquisition-Tilted Search Distribution 

With the LLM prior pθ,α and the acquisition function at defined, our desired search policy πt fol-lows directly from the variational objective in Eq. (2). This variational problem is a canonical in-stance of the Gibbs variational principle (equivalently, the Donsker–Varadhan representation of the KL divergence) (Donsker and Varadhan, 1975; Bissiri et al., 2016), whose unique maximiser is the exponentially tilted distribution. This form of KL-regularised reward maximisation is the same mathematical foundation underlying maximum-entropy reinforcement learning, control-as-inference (Levine, 2018), and the closed-form policy objective in KL-regularised RLHF (Rafailov et al., 2023). 

Proposition 1 (Optimal search distribution) . The unique maximiser of (2) is 

πt(x) = 1

Zt

pθ,α (x | C t) exp η a t(x) , Zt =

Z

> x∈X

pθ,α (x | C t) exp η a t(x) dx. (3) 

Proof. Please refer to Appendix B.1. Eq. (3) shows that the optimal policy πt takes an acquisition-tilted form, where the base measure is reweighted by the exponent of the acquisition function. Interestingly, this policy draws an analogy to the infinite-armed bandit framework (Berry et al., 1997; Wang et al., 2008): as scientific designs (arms) cannot be listed in advance, they are revealed from a reservoir distribution, and the policy tilts that reservoir toward arms it judges valuable. In this reading, 

pθ,α (· | C t) plays the role of the reservoir, η a t(x) acts as the strength-of-reward tilt, and Zt is the usual log-sum-exp normaliser. A clear interpretation of the inference configuration α and the KL-regularisation coefficient η

can be drawn through standard analysis of infinite-armed bandits. We restrict attention to the 9common case in which the reservoir admits the temperature form 

pθ,α (x | C t) ∝ pθ(x | C t)α, (4) where pθ denotes the unconditional base proposal. This is the exponential family of reservoirs commonly used in the bandit literature, and it makes α transparent as the strength of the prior: large values of α concentrate probability mass on modes of pθ, while α → 0 spreads mass toward a uniform measure on X . Substituting this form into (3) and taking the mode gives the bandit-style argmax 

xt+1 = arg max 

> x∈X

h

α log pθ(x | C t) + η a t(x)

i

, (5) which picks the arm that maximises a weighted combination of the prior log-mass log pθ and the reward tilt at, i.e., the bandit analogue of selecting the most promising revealed arm. Examining the two limiting cases of the temperature form pθ,α (x | C t) ∝ pθ(x | C t)α situates LDM relative to related paradigms. As η → 0, the tilt vanishes and πt collapses to the raw reservoir pθ,α (· | C t), so search is driven entirely by the generative model with no data feedback. As α → 0 the reservoir spreads toward a uniform measure on X and the policy becomes 

πt ∝ exp {η a t(·)}, recovering classical Bayesian optimisation once η is also taken large. LDM is the regime between these two limit points, where both the structured prior and the uncertainty-aware acquisition contribute to the policy. We note, however, that some LLM inference backends do not admit the temperature form pθ(x | C t)α, and the preceding analysis should be read as the canonical case under which the role of α is most cleanly interpreted. With this construction, LDM defines a discovery policy πt from which new designs may be drawn using either a stochastic or a deterministic approach, as illustrated by Eq. (5). In practice, the normalising constant Zt is never computed explicitly, and we instead rely on inference-time search to approximate draws from the tilted distribution. 

3.2 Surrogate Modelling of the Reward Function 

To efficiently navigate the design space, we require a probabilistic model over function space that treats the reward function R as a random function and models the posterior belief R | D t

conditioned on our cumulative evaluations. Our LDM formulation is largely inspired by the uncertainty-aware decision-making paradigm of Bayesian optimisation (Garnett, 2023). We model this objective using a Gaussian Process (GP) (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). GPs serve as highly effective surrogates in this setting because they are exceptionally sample-efficient, admit exact Bayesian updates, and provide principled non-parametric uncertainty estimates across unexplored regions of the design space. Formally, we define the prior distribution over the reward function as: 

R(x) ∼ GP  m(x), k (x, x ′), (6) where m : X → R is the prior mean function and k : X × X → R is a positive-definite kernel function capturing spatial correlation. By conditioning this prior on the historical data Dt = {(xi, r i)}ti=1 , we obtain a Gaussian posterior distribution characterised by a predictive mean μt(x) and a predictive variance σ2 

> t

(x)for any candidate point x ∈ X . These two statistical moments allow us to construct acquisition functions that elegantly balance exploitation (seeking high predicted rewards) and exploration (targeting regions of high uncertainty). For instance, the popular Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition function is formulated as: 

aUCB  

> t

(x) = μt(x) + pβt σt(x), (7) 10 LLM reservoir  GP surrogate  

> reward model
> , acquisition
> acquisition-tilted search
> draw candidate batch
> update context
> feedback
> update data
> evaluate for all
> base measure
> loss function
> update weight
> Empirical Search Distirbution
> test-time-search dataset
> candidates:
> acuiqistion values:

Slow 

Learning  Fast 

Learning acquisition 

> function

Figure 5: The Large Discovery Model learning loop. The right (cyan) region denotes the fast learning loop of the LDM’s recurrent discovery: a candidate batch Bt is drawn and evaluated, and the observations update the surrogate data Dt and the LLM context Ct. The left (yellow) side corresponds to the slow learning loop , which amortises the acquisition-tilted search policy into the LLM’s weights θ via LDM-TTS fine-tuning (see §3.4). All candidates {ˆxi,t }Ni=1 gen-erated by the LLM during test-time search, alongside their respective acquisition values, are recorded to a TTS dataset. Using this dataset, we fit the empirical search distribution into the network, endowing the foundation model with generalisable discovery expertise to enable stronger discovery performance on subsequent tasks. The fast loop iterates with each batch of reward evaluation within a specific discovery task, while the slow loop is executed only after sufficient new samples spanning diverse tasks have been collected for the TTS dataset. where βt > 0 is a parameter scaling the exploration incentive. The complete technical details of the posterior inference, along with the formulation of other common acquisition functions, are provided in Appendix C.1. Because UCB decomposes the decision value into a high-mean and a high-uncertainty term, the tilted policy πt(x) ∝ pθ,α (x | C t) exp {η a t(x)} of Eq. (3) instantiates the discovery–exploration– exploitation triangle of Figure 3 directly: the LLM reservoir term realises discovery, the high-σt

tail of at realises exploration, and the high-μt mode realises exploitation. We use UCB as the running example precisely because the trade-off is explicit in its closed form; in richer acquisitions the same triangle is realised only implicitly through the surrogate. 

3.3 Acquisition-Tilted Inference-Time Search 

Exact evaluation or direct sampling of πt is generally intractable because the base measure is induced by an LLM decoding process rather than given as a tractable density over a closed finite space. Moreover, the resulting design space is typically large and open-ended, and the normalising constant of the acquisition-tilted distribution cannot be computed exactly. We 11 therefore approximate πt by inference-time search: the LLM first proposes a finite candidate pool, and the acquisition function then reweights or selects among these candidates. This turns test-time compute into search effort guided by the acquisition function, rather than by model-internal confidence or linguistic plausibility (Wang et al., 2024). Concretely, at round t we draw a finite pool of N candidates from the LLM-induced proposal, 

{ˆxt,i }Ni=1 ∼ pθ,α (· | C t),

where stochastic re-sampling or deterministic selection is then performed to produce the design 

xt to evaluate at the current step. The stochastic approach approximates sampling from the acquisition-tilted distribution by softmax reweighting over this finite pool: Pr( xt = ˆ xt,i ) = exp η a t(ˆ xt,i )

PNj=1 exp η a t(ˆ xt,j ) . (8) When η = 0, the selected candidate is sampled uniformly from the proposed pool, ignoring the acquisition scores. As η increases, probability mass concentrates on candidates with larger acquisition values. In the limit η → ∞ , the stochastic rule degenerates to deterministic best-of-

N selection: 

xt+1 = arg max  

> i∈{ 1,...,N }

at(ˆ xt,i ). (9) Candidate pool size N plays a critical role in test-time compute scaling , a powerful technique for LLM reasoning (Wang, 2025), and LDM adapts this core advantage to discovery tasks. Larger 

N improves the fidelity of the finite-pool approximation to the acquisition-tilted distribution and can improve empirical performance, at the cost of additional LLM inference and surrogate evaluation. This aligns with the established finding that test-time compute can substitute for model scale in LLM reasoning, with the key distinction that LDM uses the acquisition function as explicit search guidance rather than relying on the model’s own self-evaluation or linguistic plausibility. The same construction extends naturally to batched inference-time search that chooses multiple designs at the same time. The deterministic limit selects the top-b candidates according to at.Meanwhile, the stochastic version samples a diverse acquisition-weighted batch, for example through Gumbel-top-b sampling over the same softmax weights (see Appendix C.3). The finite-pool reweighting scheme above is simple and generator-agnostic: it only requires the ability to sample candidate designs from the LLM-induced proposal and to evaluate their ac-quisition scores. It therefore applies uniformly across modalities (e.g., text, molecular strings, graphs, and programmes), without requiring a representation-specific search algorithm. This full-candidate reweighting scheme forms the basis of our experiments. For sequentially gen-erated design spaces such as sequences and programs, the same principle can be extended to intermediate generation steps via a prefix value function: 

V (xt, ≤i) = Ext,>i 

at(xt, ≤i, x t,>i ),

enabling more advanced methods such as beam search and Monte Carlo Tree Search (Feng et al., 2024b). These multi-step variants offer further search coverage at higher computational cost, and we leave their full empirical evaluation as future work. 

3.4 Consolidating acquisition-tilted inference via model fine-tuning 

The preceding sections keep the model parameters θ fixed and realise the acquisition-tilted policy through inference-time computation. The procedure acts as a policy-improvement operator 12 Chat LLM 

> aligns with human priors

Reasoning LLM 

> navigates closed-world logic

Discovery LLM 

> explores open-world boundary

Preference value 

subjective intuition, helpfulness, safety 

Verification value 

ground truth, tests, process verifiers 

Epistemic value 

μt, σ t, information gain, Pareto expansion 

Alignment FT 

distil human preferences 

Reasoning FT 

distil logical trajectories 

Discovery FT 

distil acquisition policy 

Assistant 

generate responses that satisfy user intent 

Solver 

navigate paths to reach verifiable truth 

Research manager 

propose experiments to maximise epistemic progress 

our target 

Figure 6: Fine-tuning as value distillation across model regimes. Chat LLMs distil hu-man preference value to align with subjective intuition. Reasoning LLMs distil verification value to navigate deterministic proof paths. In contrast, Discovery LLMs distil epistemic acquisition value. Rather than merely memorising static, domain-specific solutions, discovery fine-tuning trains a research manager that learns an intrinsic acquisition strategy that prioritising high-information experiments to expand open-world boundaries and advance an evolving research trajectory. 

within a discovery episode, and require large budget to repeat the same over-generation and scoring process at every search state. We now consider consider the complementary route of scaling computation across episodes. Search states, candidate pools, and acquisition decisions accumulated by LDM-TTS become experience for slow-learning the proposal model. There two routes form a recurrent search–learn cycle as illustrated in Figure 5. Search adapts decisions to the current empirical posterior; parameter learning consolidates recurring search improvements across states and tasks; and the learned proposer provides a stronger starting distribution for subsequent search. 

Acquisition-guided policy learning, not reward-guided The distinguishing feature of this update is the decision value used for supervision. As summarised in Figure 6, alignment learning commonly follows human preference value (Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023), while reasoning-model training commonly follows trajectories leading to verifier-approved an-swers (Wang et al., 2024). Scientific models may also be trained directly on these measured properties, teaching them which completed molecules, proteins, or programs received high re-ward (Liu et al., 2025; Cao and Wang, 2026). These are useful but different targets compared to LDM. LDM learns from the state-dependent acquisition value of the next experimental action :whether a candidate is worth developing or evaluating given the observations, constraints, and search frontier at the current round. Acquisition value is not identical to predicted or realised reward. In scientific discovery, the decision value of a move is inherently Bayesian: it balances predicted quality ( μt), epistemic 13 uncertainty ( σt), physical constraint satisfaction, and Pareto-frontier expansion. An experimen-tal move can therefore be highly valuable even when it does not immediately maximize the posterior mean. This mirrors the counter-intuitive, high-information exploratory actions seen in breakthrough AI systems, such as AlphaZero’s famous “Move 37” (Silver et al., 2017; Schut et al., 2025). A move is valuable because it resolves a critical unknown, opens a novel region of the search space, or alters the future trajectory of the research process. LDM fine-tuning aims to embed this hidden acquisition-value structure directly into the model’s internal decision bias. By doing so, the model learns the strategic risk-taking required to manage an evolving research state, rather than merely imitating historical end solutions. 

Acquisition-reweighted data collection. At search state Ct, let bXt = {ˆxt,i }Ni=1 be the candidate pool sampled from pθ,α (· | C t) as in Section 3.3. The surrogate assigns an acquisition score to every candidate, inducing the finite-pool sampling distribution 

bπ(N ) 

> t

(ˆ xt,i | C t) = exp {η a t(ˆ xt,i )}

PNj=1 exp {η a t(ˆ xt,j )} . (10) Because the pool itself is sampled from the LLM reservoir, this empirical reweighting is a finite-sample approximation of the complete tilted policy in Equation (3); the structured generative prior is implicit in which candidates enter the pool, while the exponential factor supplies the empirically grounded policy improvement. This construction yields more supervision than the single candidate that is eventually sent for costly evaluation. Candidates generated under the same history form counterfactual next actions, and their surrogate scores reveal how their exploitation, exploration, feasibility, and frontier-expansion values compare at that particular search state. We record these search states and candidate traces as LDM-TTS search experience and retain high-value actions according to bπ(N ) 

> t

. This acquisition-reweighted collection defines the training distribution. Rather than sampling traces explicitly, the same distribution can be implemented by weighting each record in proportion to its acquisition tilt when learning pϕ. In this sense, parameter learning amortises part of the computation performed by repeated search without making the learned proposer identical to the online search policy. 

Reasoning augmentation. Although an acquisition score provides a precise ranking, a scalar alone if less informative and does not expose the reusable reason why an action advances the search (Feng et al., 2024a; Song et al., 2026). We therefore optionally augment a retained action with a concise rationale zt,i that interprets the decision in the current research state. The rationale identifies relevant evidence in the history, diagnoses progress or stagnation, and states whether the proposed move should exploit a promising family, explore an uncertain one, preserve diversity, satisfy a constraint, or expand the active support. In contrast to a reasoning trace for a closed problem, it explains why the next experiment is worth running , rather than how to derive a known correct answer. At the meantime, converting acquisition scalar value to natural language enable the model/agent to allocate more tokens at test time and scale up this ”discovery reasoning”. Let ¯ wt,i denote normalised acquisition weights derived from Equation (10). We train the pro-poser with the weighted autoregressive objective 

LSFT (ϕ) = − X

> t,i

¯wt,i [λz log pϕ(zt,i | C t) + log pϕ(ˆ xt,i | C t, z t,i )] , (11) where λz = 1 gives reasoning-augmented policy learning. For action-only policy learning, zt,i 

is omitted, λz = 0, and the candidate is conditioned directly on Ct. If traces are sampled 14 from bπ(N ) 

> t

during dataset construction, the same objective may be implemented with uniform example weights. 

Complete LDM training pipeline Figure 26 in Appendix provide an overview of the com-plete training workflow from test-time search to data construction and supervised fine-tuning. In our experiments, we use strong model to perform high-budget search as teacher, and smaller-size open-sourced model as student, and the intermediate data construction and post-process determine what and how the student learn from its teacher. The two compute routes in Figure 5 therefore remain complementary. Within a task, the fast search loop uses new observations to recalibrate value and redirect computation. Across accu-mulated LDM-TTS trajectories, the slow learning loop consolidates recurring acquisition-guided decisions into the proposal model. The experiments in Section 6.4 test whether this consolida-tion improves the reservoir and whether the learned research-management policy transfers to targets and tasks absent from the fine-tuning data. 

## 4 The Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 The Large Discovery Model Loop 

Require: Reward function R : X → R; prior mean m(·); kernel k(·, ·); initial dataset D1; initial context C1; evaluation budget T ; batch size b; candidate pool size N . 

> 1:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 2:

Update the active decision domain: At ← supp pθ,α (· | C t) 

> 3:

Fit Gaussian-process surrogate over At using data Dt to obtain the posterior R | D t ∼GP (μt, k t), given by Eqs. (29), (30) ▷ Full derivation in Appendix C.1.  

> 4:

Construct acquisition function at by combining {μt, σ t} ▷ e.g. Eq. (32) or (31).  

> 5:

Draw Bt = {xt, 1, . . . , x t,b } from πt ∝ pθ,α (· | C t) exp {η a t} using Algorithm 2  

> 6:

Observe black-box noisy rewards rt,i = R(xt,i ) + ϵt,i for all xt,i ∈ Bt 

> 7:

Update dataset: Dt+1 ← D t ∪ { (xt,i , r t,i )}bi=1  

> 8:

Update context: Ct+1 ← C t ∪ { (xt,i , r t,i )}bi=1 ∪ { Reflection feedback (if applicable) } 

> 9:

return arg max (x,r )∈D T +1 r

Algorithm 2 Acquisition-Guided Inference-time Sampling 

Require: LLM prior pθ,α (· | C t); acquisition function at; tilt parameter η; pool size N ; batch size b; selection mode ∈ { deterministic , stochastic }. 

> 1:

Sample N candidate designs from the LLM prior: {ˆxt,i }Ni=1 ∼ pθ,α (· | C t) 

> 2:

Compute acquisition scores si ← at(ˆ xt,i ) for i = 1 , . . . , N  

> 3:

if selection mode = deterministic then  

> 4:

Let i1, . . . , i b be the indices of the b largest scores si, and set Bt ← { ˆxt,i k }bk=1 ▷ Top-b

by acquisition.  

> 5:

else if selection mode = stochastic then  

> 6:

Compute exponentiated-acquisition weights wi ← exp {η s i} for i = 1 , . . . , N  

> 7:

Sample Bt = {ˆxt,i k }bk=1 from the weights w1, . . . , w N via Gumbel-top-b ▷ See §C.3.  

> 8:

return Bt

In this section, we present the algorithm to apply an LDM in sequential experimental designs for scientific discovery. As illustrated in Figure 5, the LDM drives an iterative loop that tightly coordinates a generative foundation model with a data-driven verification surrogate. Each round 15 constructs the tilted search policy, draws a batch of promising candidates, evaluates them with real experiments, and updates both the numeric results and the generative context with new observations. If the surrogate identifies a stale regime (cf. §6), the LLM is invoked to append a 

reflection feedback summary to Ct, thereby ensuring that subsequent proposals remain aligned with the most recent mechanistic understanding. This operation is orthogonal to the tilted-search core. The complete iterative procedure is formalised in Algorithm 1, while the inner inference-time sampling loop is specified in Algorithm 2. 

4.1 Policy Construction and Realisation 

We construct the approximate tilted policy by reweighting an LLM-derived base measure with the acquisition function. Depending on the design space, the base measure pθ,α (· | C t) can be instantiated in two ways. 

Direct Generation. The LLM directly generates complete candidate designs from its autore-gressive decoding distribution. Invalid candidates can be removed by rejection sampling with a validity checker. 

Indirect Parameterisation. When direct generation of valid designs is inefficient, the LLM instead specifies a parameterised search region, such as its centre, radius, or local bounds. An external sampler then generates candidates within this region. This decouples LLM inference from candidate generation and allows the pool size N to be scaled more efficiently. Both paradigms integrate seamlessly with the inference-time sampling pipeline. Determinis-tic top-b selection ranks the finite pool by acquisition. Gumbel-top-b draws a Plackett–Luce weighted sample without replacement, avoiding duplicate selections in batched evaluation (Kool et al., 2019). The candidate pool size N serves as the primary dial for test-time compute scaling, enabling a continuous trade-off between inference cost and search quality. 

4.2 Surrogate on the Dynamic Support 

Under indirect parameterisation, the LLM defines not only candidate proposals but also the active search domain. We write this domain as 

At := supp pθ,α (· | C t) ⊆ X .

Here, X may denote the full space of experimental designs, while At is a lower-dimensional parameterised subspace selected by the LLM at round t, such as a set of schedule variables, architectural choices, or local search bounds. This restricted support simplifies both search and surrogate modelling. Rather than modelling the full space X , the GP is defined over At and can be fit using historical observations whose designs lie in the current support: Dt|At = {(x, r ) ∈ D t : x ∈ At}, where r denotes the observed reward associated with design x. Since At is explicitly parameterised, the GP kernel and mean function can be defined directly in this reduced space. As the LLM changes or expands the active search domain across rounds, the surrogate is updated accordingly on the new At.

4.3 Practical Implementation 

The framework supports several extensions commonly needed in scientific discovery: (1) con-strained and cost-aware acquisition , where feasibility constraints and heterogeneous evaluation costs are incorporated through constrained expected improvement or cost-normalised acquisition 16 functions; (2) decomposed acquisition feedback , where surrogate outputs such as predictive mean, epistemic uncertainty, constraint slack, and estimated cost are provided separately to the LLM to support more targeted proposal updates; (3) multi-objective optimisation , where the scalar acquisition function is replaced by Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI) for vector-valued objectives; and (4) batch selection , where, for parallel evaluations with b > 1, candidates are sampled without replacement from the finite-pool tilted distribution using Gumbel-top-b

sampling (see §C.3). Technical details are provided in Appendix C. 

## 5 Theoretical Analyses 

We now present a theoretical analysis of LDM that explicitly captures its distinctive interaction between an LLM-defined, dynamically evolving search space and acquisition-guided Bayesian optimisation. Unlike standard GP-UCB analyses, which assume optimisation over a fixed and fully accessible domain, our analysis allows the set of reachable candidates to depend on the LLM reservoir and the evolving discovery context. This yields a new regret decomposition that separates three sources of error: the discovery gap caused by the reservoir not yet reaching high-quality regions, the conventional surrogate-based optimisation error within the currently reachable region, and the LDM sampling shortfall incurred because candidates are sampled from an acquisition-tilted proposal rather than obtained by exact acquisition maximisation. The resulting bound therefore makes explicit how both the support and the probability allocation of the LLM proposal affect discovery performance. This section is self-contained, and readers primarily interested in the empirical results may safely skip it. Let X denote the design space, and let x⋆ ∈ arg max x∈X R(x) be a global maximiser of the unknown objective function. Importantly, performance is measured with respect to the true objective R, rather than the uncertainty-aware acquisition function used to guide search. After 

T evaluations, the simple regret is Reg T = R(x⋆) − max  

> 1≤t≤T

R(xt). (12) At round t, the inference configuration α induces the effective proposal distribution pθ,α (· | C t), and its support (the LLM-controlled dynamic search domain of Section 4) is 

At := supp pθ,α (· | C t) = {x ∈ X : pθ,α (x | C t) > 0}.

The LDM then samples the next candidate xt ∼ πt, where 

πt(x) = exp( η a t(x)) pθ,α (x | C t)

P 

> u∈At

exp( η a t(u)) pθ,α (u | C t) . (13) Here, at(x) = μt(x) + √βtσt(x) is the UCB acquisition function (matching the LDM convention in Section 3). To relate this performance criterion to the per-round behaviour of the algorithm, define the instantaneous regret at round t as Reg t = R(x⋆) − R(xt). Here, t indexes evaluations under the true objective R, rather than internal LLM interaction steps. For simplicity, the analysis focuses on sequential selection and does not model batch selection. Equivalently, the simple regret after T trials is Reg T = min 1≤t≤T Reg t. In the analysis below, we first study the cumulative behaviour of {Reg t}Tt=1 , from which a simple regret guarantee follows via the standard relation Reg T ≤ 1

> T

PTt=1 Reg t.

Instantaneous Regret Decomposition as Discovery Gap and Optimisation Regret. 

For each round t, define the best objective value attainable within the current reservoir support 17 as R⋆t,A = max x∈At R(x). Then, the instantaneous regret admits the exact decomposition Reg t = R(x⋆) − R(xt) (14) = R(x⋆) − R⋆t,A 

| {z }

> Reg disc
> t

+ R⋆t,A − R(xt)

| {z }

> Reg opt
> t

. (15) The first term, Reg disc  

> t

, is the discovery gap : it measures the loss incurred because the current reservoir support At may not contain designs sufficiently close to the global optimum. This term is zero whenever x⋆ ∈ At. The second term, Reg opt  

> t

, is the optimisation regret within the currently discovered region: it measures how far the sampled point xt is from the best candidate available in At.This decomposition separates the two roles of the LDM. The reservoir distribution controls whether high-quality regions are discovered at all, while the acquisition tilt controls how effec-tively the algorithm selects promising candidates among those currently reachable. Below, we will give the necessary assumptions and definitions to support the regret bound analysis. 

Assumption 1 (UCB calibration) . For a non-decreasing sequence ( βt)t≥1, with probability at least 1 − δgp , simultaneously for all t ≤ T and x ∈ X ,

|R(x) − μt(x)| ≤ pβt σt(x).

This event is implied by the standard kernel bandit conditions: R(x) = m(x) + g(ϕ(x)) with g ∈Hk, bounded RKHS norm, bounded kernel diagonal, and conditionally sub-Gaussian observation noise (Srinivas et al., 2010; Chowdhury and Gopalan, 2017). 

Assumption 2 (Reservoir coverage and local regularity) . Let d X be a distance on the design space and define the reservoir coverage radius rcov  

> t

= inf x∈At dX (x, x ⋆). The objective is one-sided H¨ older around the optimum: there exist L > 0 and χ ∈ (0 , 1] such that, for all x ∈ X ,

R(x⋆) − R(x) ≤ L dX (x, x ⋆)χ.

This local H¨ older condition is a standard regularity device in continuum- and X-armed bandits: it converts the reservoir coverage distance into an objective gap (Bubeck et al., 2011). Related infinite-armed bandit analyses characterise a reservoir through the probability that a newly sampled arm is near-optimal (Wang et al., 2008); this complementary viewpoint motivates treating the LLM proposal as a reservoir over structured designs. Let a⋆t,A = sup x∈At at(x) be the maximum value of the acquisition function at t-th round. Then, for any tolerance ζt ≥ 0, let Ut(ζt) = {x ∈ At : at(x) ≥ a⋆t,A − ζt} be the set of candidates in the current reservoir support 

At whose acquisition value is within ζt of the best acquisition value. We denote the reservoir probability mass assigned to this near-best set by 

κt(ζt) = pθ,α 

 Ut(ζt) | C t

. (16) The bound below depends on the size of κt(ζt): a small near-UCB mass means that the LLM reservoir makes high-acquisition designs hard to sample even after exponential tilting. As an observable reservoir-quality quantity, κt records how much proposal mass is available near the best current acquisition value. 

Lemma 1 (Gibbs near-UCB sampling) . Conditioned on the history Ct, fix any ζt ≥ 0 such that the near-UCB set has reservoir mass κt(ζt). Then, for any ρt ∈ (0 , 1) , we have 

P



a⋆t,A − at(xt) ≤ ζt + 1

η log 1

ρtκt(ζt) Ct



≥ 1 − ρt. (17) 18 Let 

γT = sup   

> B⊂X ,|B|≤ T

12 log det( I + λ−1KB ), Cλ = 2log(1 + λ−1) ,

where KB is the kernel matrix on B.

Theorem 1 (Average-regret bound of the large discovery model) . Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Fix δgp , δ samp ∈ (0 , 1) and choose ρt > 0 such that PTt=1 ρt ≤ δsamp . Then, for any ζt ≥ 0

with κt(ζt) > 0, with probability at least 1 − δgp − δsamp ,

1

T

> T

X

> t=1

Reg t ≤ LT

> T

X

> t=1

(rcov  

> t

)χ

| {z }

> discovery gap

+ 2

r CλβT γT

T| {z }

> GP-UCB optimisation

+ 1

T

> T

X

> t=1



ζt + 1

η log 1

ρtκt(ζt)

| {z }

> LDM sampling shortfall

.

Corollary 1 (Simple regret) . Under the conditions of Theorem 1, the same right-hand side also upper-bounds the simple regret Reg T = min 1≤t≤T Reg t, because min t Reg t ≤ T −1 PTt=1 Reg t.

The first term is the gap of not yet having generated candidates near the true optimum. The second is the usual GP-UCB information-gain term within the covered region. The third is the cost of sampling from the tilted LDM distribution rather than exactly maximising UCB over 

At; it decreases when the acquisition tilt η is sharper or when the near-UCB reservoir mass 

κt(ζt) is larger. The LLM affects the regret bound through the reservoir support At and its distribution pθ,α (· | Ct). First, an informative LLM can propose candidates closer to the global optimum, thereby reducing the coverage radius rcov  

> t

and hence the discovery-gap term. Second, it can assign sub-stantial probability mass to candidates with high acquisition values, increasing κt(ζt) and reduc-ing the LDM sampling-shortfall term. Thus, the LLM provides a structured, history-dependent proposal distribution that can focus evaluations on semantically plausible and promising regions of the design space, rather than searching the entire space uniformly. 

## 6 Experiments 

A central premise of LDM is that the same general discovery engine can operate across hetero-geneous domains without reducing discovery to a fixed, domain-specific search procedure. We therefore evaluate LDM on three case studies spanning markedly different scientific objects, rep-resentations, objectives, and evaluation processes: neural-network training programs, antibody sequences, and small molecules. Together, these case studies test whether LDM can combine a generative prior, an empirically calibrated value model, and acquisition-guided search across both discrete and open-ended hypothesis spaces. All three case studies are evaluated through in-silico or digital-oracle benchmarks, which make it possible to run controlled sequential-search experiments. The LDM loop is agnostic to the evaluator and can use wet-lab measurements in place of these digital objectives; validating such wet-lab deployments is an important direction for future work. Section 6.1 introduces the three discovery settings and their experimental protocols: an au-tonomous research loop for improving neural-network training programs (Karpathy, 2026); anti-body CDRH3 sequence design (Khan et al., 2022); and multi-objective small-molecule discovery targeting KRAS G12D (Kumar et al., 2026). For each setting, we also present a representa-tive discovery trajectory to illustrate how LDM generates, evaluates, and refines hypotheses through sequential feedback. Section 6.2 isolates the mechanisms responsible for this behaviour, including the test-time search budget, the acquisition function, and the distinction between 19 acquisition-guided discovery and search without a calibrated value model. Section 6.3 compares LDM with the relevant domain-specific baselines. Finally, Section 6.4 investigates whether the discovery experience accumulated through high-budget LDM test-time search can be distilled into a reusable proposer, and evaluates its out-of-distribution generalisation to previously unseen targets and tasks. Additional ablations and detailed analyses are provided in the appendix. 

6.1 Overview of the Case Studies 

The three case studies are selected to expose complementary challenges in general-purpose discovery and to represent different epistemic regimes introduced in Section 2. They vary not only in the objects being designed, but also in how the hypothesis space is represented, how candidates are modified, and how empirical feedback is obtained. The autoresearch setting studies discovery through multi-turn program editing . The agent maintains a persistent research state, repeatedly modifies a neural-network training program, and evaluates each modification through an actual training run. Because program edits can introduce new abstractions, mechanisms, and combinations of ideas, the agent can reshape the effective hypothesis space as discovery proceeds. Antibody CDRH3 design represents a large discrete combinatorial problem in the known-unknown regime. The sequence space and its basic representation are specified in advance, but the relationship between a sequence and its binding affinity is unknown and costly to evaluate. This setting therefore tests whether LDM can efficiently explore a well-defined but extremely large design space under limited empirical feedback. Small-molecule discovery represents the more open-ended unknown-unknown regime. The space of valid and synthetically plausible molecular structures cannot be reduced to a fixed candidate catalogue, while desirable compounds must simultaneously satisfy multiple and potentially com-peting objectives. This setting tests whether LDM can propose new scaffolds, expand the reach-able molecular space, and direct evaluations toward promising regions that were not specified in advance. Taken together, these settings progress from executable programs, through biological sequences, to chemical structures. They allow us to examine whether LDM functions as a common discovery engine across domains while adapting its generation and empirical evaluation mechanisms to the structure of each problem. For each case study, we first motivate the discovery setting, then specify the experimental protocol, and finally examine a representative trajectory of sequential generation, evaluation, and refinement. 

6.1.1 Autonomous research loop 

We use a popular public autoresearch project (Karpathy, 2026) as a testbed for acquisition-guided LLM search. In autoresearch , a coding agent repeatedly modifies a single file, train.py ;each candidate program is evaluated by training a small language model for a fixed five-minute budget and measuring validation bits per byte ( val bpb , lower is better). The original sys-tem provides only the LLM proposal-and-evaluation loop, to which we add the surrogate and acquisition-guided search. Under the LDM notation, a program is a design x with the reward: 

R(x) = −val bpb (x),

where the agent, conditioned on the current context, defines the proposal distribution pθ(· | C t), and the accumulated program–performance pairs form the dataset Dt used to fit the surrogate. This benchmark provides a natural setting for LDM: candidates are executable programs, each evaluation returns a quantitative non-differentiable objective, and the fixed training schedule 20 enables controlled comparison across search methods. Crucially, it is not a fixed-dimensional hyperparameter problem: as the agent discovers new training-program mechanisms, the surro-gate must acquire new coordinates on which to model them, exercising LDM’s dynamic search-support mechanism ( §4.2). We instantiate LDM using indirect parameterisation. Rather than generating raw program text, the LLM identifies tunable degrees of freedom in train.py , such as learning rate, width, depth, and related hyperparameters, thereby defining a continuous search space. We fit a Gaussian process with an RBF kernel over this space, keeping its hyperparameters fixed for stability in the small-data regime. Expected Improvement (Eq. (31)) is used as the acquisition function. Each round, the LLM proposes a pool of candidate configurations conditioned on Ct, and the surrogate selects the next configuration to evaluate by maximising EI, with a diversity term for batched rounds. When progress stalls, reflection allows the LLM to revise the parameterisation by adding or reshaping search dimensions. The primary comparison holds the coding model, environment, and five-minute-per-run budget fixed, contrasting the original Karpathy LLM-only loop against the full LDM. 

Figure 7: The discover loop on autoresearch . Validation val bpb (lower is better) versus search progress. The H100 panel compares the no-discover Karpathy baseline with the LDM; the B200 panel reports a matched-hardware leaderboard run of the LDM. B200 width scaled for legibility. Figure 7 shows an initial period of improvement followed by a plateau and a second improvement phase after the search space is revised: the LDM detects that local tuning of the current parameterisation has stalled, and the reflection mechanism expands the active search support to reach a new, more promising regime. This plateau-and-revision pattern is the discovery operation of §2 in action, and it recurs across the three domains. Table 1 summarises the retained changes and their measured contributions. Under the fixed training-time budget, improvements must come from processing more tokens or learning more effectively from each token; each retained change is a physics-grounded discovery about how to make a language model learn faster inside a fixed wall-clock budget. Component-level results that isolate the contribution of each design choice are reported in Section 6.2 and Appendix D. 

6.1.2 Antibody CDRH3 design 

We select antibody CDRH3 loop design as our second case study because it represents a canoni-cal high-dimensional combinatorial optimisation problem with a well-defined design space. The 21 Change Why it helps under a fixed time budget ∆val bpb                    

> n-gram hash memory memorises local n-gram patterns at zero FLOP −0.0275 QK-norm steadier steps, more learning per step −0.0137 Narrower model (dim 768 →640) cheaper steps ⇒more steps in 300 s −0.0109 Windowed attention + softcap cheaper attention ⇒more tokens/sec −0.0108 Squared-ReLU richer per-token MLP representation −0.0087 Value embeddings extra per-token signal at near-zero cost −0.0079 Muon optimiser orthogonalised gradients, more learning per token −0.0048

Table 1: The autoresearch run as physics-grounded discovery. Each row lists a change the LDM retained under a fixed 300 s budget, the physical mechanism by which it helps, and the resulting change in val bpb .CDRH3 loop is the primary determinant of antibody binding specificity, with sequences of length L ≈ 11 drawn from 20 amino acids, yielding a discrete space of size 20 11 . This setting falls into the known unknown regime of §2: the syntax and boundaries of the design space are fully specified, but the sequence-to-affinity mapping is unknown, highly rugged, and expen-sive to evaluate. Traditional combinatorial Bayesian optimisation methods struggle with the intractable size of this discrete space, while pure LLM generation lacks calibrated value guid-ance. The task therefore tests whether LDM can combine structured proposal generation with acquisition-guided selection in a large discrete search space. We use the Absolut! structure-based simulator as a black-box oracle that returns the lattice binding energy Ebind (Khan et al., 2022). We maximise R(x) = −Ebind (x) because lower binding energy implies stronger affinity, and each evaluation is a single expensive oracle call. Experiments run sequentially, with one antibody candidate selected per iteration. We evaluate across five PDB targets, including 1ADQ A, 1FBI X, 1H0D C, 1NSN S, and 1OB1 C, with a total budget of 200 evaluations per target, reporting mean performance and one standard deviation over multiple random seeds. We implement four LDM variants formed by two orthogonal design choices: two LLM base gen-eration strategies, paired with two acquisition weighting rules. Here Policy denotes the indirect parameterisation of §4: the LLM parameterises a sampling policy (with internal complexity), and the policy implicitly induces the base measure pθ,α (· | C t). The Direct base measure generates sequences token-by-token with a small sample pool of m = 5. The Policy base measure lets the LLM output structured search parameters to spawn a much larger candidate pool. Following §3.3, inference-time search includes both deterministic and stochastic variants: 

Max picks the highest-acquisition candidate, while Softmax samples proportionally to expo-nentiated acquisition scores to approximate the full tilted distribution. Table 2 summarises all combinations. LDM Variant Base Measure pθ(x | C t) Reduction Rule Direct Max Direct token-level sequence generation Max Direct Softmax Direct token-level sequence generation Softmax Policy Max Structured search policy from LLM output Max Policy Softmax Structured search policy from LLM output Softmax Table 2: Implemented LDM algorithm variants for computational antibody design. Figure 8 visualises a representative LDM optimisation trajectory on the 1FBI X antigen, illus-trating the core exploit–explore–discover cycle described in §4. Initial LLM sampling quickly hits a local performance ceiling; the LDM detects stagnation and triggers discovery steps to ex-pand the sequence families under consideration. Each numbered marker indicates a search-space 22 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Evaluation # 

−120 

−110 

−100 

−90 

−80 

−70 

−60 

−50 

> BestValue / binding energy (lower is better)

fi rst 20 evals: direct LLM sequence choices LDM_fn_one_argmax best-so-far Single evaluated sequence Direct LLM initialization   

> 1
> -79.62
> 2-87.87
> 3
> -93.38
> 4
> -104.14
> 5
> -111.07
> 6
> -113.56
> 7
> -114.76

-115.03 

Final best 

Key events   

> Selected run: best fi nal value among 25 formal LDM_fn_one_argmax-style runs; also best among the fi ve 1FBI_X seeds. Each event lists the best 11-aa antibody at that point and the search behavior associated with the improvement.

1. LDM sets the fi rst search region after initialization stall (-79.62)  

> Antibody: IFYEMAPDKHG
> After direct LLM initialization stops improving, LDM updates the search setup and the BO loop evaluates candidates in that region.

2. LDM fi nds the fi rst large improvement (-87.87)   

> Antibody: IFYEMKPNWHI
> The fi rst post-initialization search region produces a clear improvement, moving the best value from -79.62 to -87.87.

3. LDM moves into a better motif family (-93.38)  

> Antibody: ILYAMKFNWLP
> LDM moves the search to a di ff erent local family, and BO discovers a stronger sequence.

4. LDM escapes the plateau with a wider search move (-104.14)  

> Antibody: ILYIFKFNYFI
> After a plateau near -95.27, LDM changes the search setup instead of continuing the same local pattern.

5. Focused LDM exploitation creates the main drop (-111.07)  

> Antibody: ILLLFGFNLFI
> Repeated local searches around related high-scoring variants turn the early gains into a much stronger best value.

6. LDM returns to a strong region and improves again (-113.56)  

> Antibody: FLLLLCFNLFI
> After many weak evaluations, LDM brings the search back to a high-performing region and extracts a smaller but meaningful improvement.

7. Near-best variants are re fi ned after a long stall (-114.76)  

> Antibody: LLLFFCFNLFF
> The run spends many evaluations near a plateau, then a focused re fi nement step improves the best value again.

8. Final best found (-115.03)   

> Antibody: LLLFFCLHLFF
> The last local re fi nement produces the fi nal best value.

Figure 8: Optimisation trajectory of the top-performing LDM run on antigen 1FBI X. The horizontal axis counts evaluation rounds; the vertical axis tracks the best binding energy found to date (lower = better). Step curve records global improvement milestones, with numbered markers highlighting major discovery events where the system introduces structurally novel sequence families after local plateaus. update followed by further improvement and local refinement. 

6.1.3 Small-molecule drug discovery 

We select multi-objective small-molecule lead discovery as the third case study to test LDM’s handling of the unknown unknown regime of §2. Unlike the antibody setting, the molecular design space is not given as a fixed finite set of candidates. Valid SMILES span a vast and open-ended chemical space, making exhaustive enumeration infeasible. Standard multi-objective Bayesian optimisation (MOBO) with string kernels lacks strong structural priors and saturates rapidly. Auxiliary expansion tools such as ReaSyn only generate analogues around fixed seed molecules, limiting exploration to narrow local chemical neighbourhoods. This setting tests whether LDM can discover new molecular scaffolds beyond the initial seed neighbourhoods. Our multi-objective task optimises two conflicting rewards for the KRAS G12D target (Kumar et al., 2026): the negated AutoDock Vina (Trott and Olson, 2010) docking score ( RVina ) and neural-network binding activity ( Ract ), both maximised. We quantify performance via the hypervolume of the Pareto front, with a fixed reference point across all experiments and a total evaluation budget of 80 iterations. Independent Gaussian Process surrogates are fitted for each reward dimension, using a subse-quence string kernel to measure similarity between SMILES strings. Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI) (Emmerich et al., 2011) is used as the multi-objective acquisition func-tion. We evaluate two LDM variants that share the same tilted sampling pipeline but differ in candidate pool construction: (1) Direct-Softmax , where the LLM generates 128 SMILES candidates for acquisition-weighted resampling; and (2) ReaSyn-Softmax , where the LLM first proposes a small set of seed SMILES and ReaSyn generates local analogues to form the candidate pool before softmax selection. Figures 9 and 10 together illustrate a complete LDM discovery workflow for small molecules. 23 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 

Evaluation index (0-based) 

0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 

> Pareto hypervolume (higher is better)

I Scaffold establishment II Substituent scan III Objective bifurcation IV Activity recovery & crossover V Saturation Late plateau +0.30 HV over rounds 52-79 

Final HV 33.63 

LDM (Direct-Softmax), seed 10086 Members of final Pareto front 

A Anchor core HV 8.47 | Vina -6.53 | NN 6.30 B Propoxy homologation dHV +2.09 | Vina -6.95 | NN 6.57 C Br consensus (17 sources) dHV +2.12 | Vina -7.11 | NN 6.93 D CF3-cyclopropyl branch dHV +2.41 | Vina -7.50 | NN 7.40 E C2F5 extension dHV +3.18 | Vina -8.73 | NN 7.43 F Butoxy-Br activity jump dHV +3.90 | Vina -7.82 | NN 8.04 G Long perfluoro tail dHV +0.89 | Vina -10.32 | NN 7.06 H Extra aryl NH2 dHV +1.60 | Vina -8.02 | NN 8.23 I Activity branch refined dHV +0.85 | Vina -8.29 | NN 8.33 J Elite crossover dHV +0.30 | Vina -10.02 | NN 7.69 

Key events in the best LDM (Direct-Softmax) trajectory Figure 9: Key milestone events along a Direct-Softmax molecular optimisation trajectory. X-axis counts evaluation steps; Y-axis plots cumulative Pareto hypervolume (higher = better). Step curve tracks global front improvements, with labelled markers denoting structural discovery events that open new families of active molecules. Shaded bands partition the optimisation into five sequential search phases. In each text box, HV represents Hyper-Volume, Vina represents the score of AutoDock Vina, and NN represents the neural network as the oracle activity prediction. HV 8.47 | Vina -6.53 | NN 6.30       

> MW 175 |LogP 1.2 |F 0 |N 3
> LLM intent: 8-methoxy local edit

A r1 Anchor core           

> dHV +2.09 |Vina -6.95 |NN 6.57
> MW 203 |LogP 2.0 |F 0 |N 3
> LLM intent: propoxy chain variation

B r7 Propoxy homologation           

> dHV +2.12 |Vina -7.11 |NN 6.93
> MW 282 |LogP 2.7 |F 0 |N 3
> LLM intent: bromo substitution

C r13 Br consensus (17 sources)           

> dHV +2.41 |Vina -7.50 |NN 7.40
> MW 299 |LogP 3.4 |F 3 |N 3
> LLM intent: trifluoromethyl cyclopropyl exploration

D r19 CF3-cyclopropyl branch           

> dHV +3.18 |Vina -8.73 |NN 7.43
> MW 349 |LogP 4.0 |F 5 |N 3
> LLM intent: extend fluorinated chain

E r21 C2F5 extension           

> dHV +3.90 |Vina -7.82 |NN 8.04
> MW 374 |LogP 4.2 |F 2 |N 3
> LLM intent: increase alkoxy, vary halogen

F r26 Butoxy-Br activity jump           

> dHV +0.89 |Vina -10.32 |NN 7.06
> MW 599 |LogP 7.2 |F 15 |N 3
> LLM intent: Longer perfluoroalkyl chain

G r29 Long perfluoro tail           

> dHV +1.60 |Vina -8.02 |NN 8.23
> MW 403 |LogP 4.2 |F 2 |N 4
> LLM intent: add amino for H-bond

H r46 Extra aryl NH2           

> dHV +0.85 |Vina -8.29 |NN 8.33
> MW 389 |LogP 3.8 |F 2 |N 4
> LLM intent: add amino to ring, shorten chain

I r49 Activity branch refined           

> dHV +0.30 |Vina -10.02 |NN 7.69
> MW 600 |LogP 6.4 |F 15 |N 4
> LLM intent: cross NH2 onto long fluorinated scaffold

J r51 Elite crossover 

Molecular evolution at key LDM (Direct-Softmax) turning points 

Figure 10: Two-dimensional molecular structures corresponding to the ten core discovery mile-stones labelled in Figure 9. Each structure is generated from canonical trajectory SMILES strings, arranged in chronological order of discovery to visualise the evolution of core chemical scaffolds and functional group substitutions. The hypervolume curve partitions optimisation into distinct stages: initial scaffold identifica-tion, substituent screening, objective bifurcation into docking- and activity-focused chemotypes, cross-family feature recombination, and final fine-tuning. The structural plot tracks how the model iteratively uncovers unrelated molecular backbones, a capability absent from standard BO or seed-local expansion tools. 24 6.2 Ablation Studies 

We next study how LDM depends on the test-time search budget and on its sampling and ac-quisition controls. Additional ablations, including the pure-LLM autoresearch loop, antibody hyperparameter sweeps, and single-step budget sweeps, are reported in Appendix D. 

6.2.1 Test-time search scaling and acquisition functions 

We ask three questions. First, does LDM exhibit the test-time scaling behaviour that motivates inference-time search in language-model reasoning (Snell et al., 2025), when the value is an expensive scientific objective approximated by a surrogate rather than a cheap verifier? Second, does discovery , i.e., expanding the search frontier into previously unknown-unknown regions, contribute to the final performance? Third, does an acquisition function that explicitly balances exploitation and exploration (EI or UCB) outperform using only the posterior mean, which is purely exploitative? We answer these questions in autoresearch as a representative setting. We keep the outer five-minute training budget fixed and vary only the cheap inner-loop budget of test-time search, which has two knobs: N , the number of candidate train.py programs the LLM proposes at each outer iteration, and H, the number of hypothesis/refinement branches each candidate is expanded into before the surrogate scores it. Together they control the number of acquisition-scored nodes per round, which we label NmHn: N4H4 scores 4 × 4 = 16 nodes per round and 

N8H8 scores 8 × 8 = 64. Because autoresearch is not a fixed-dimensional hyperparameter problem, LDM instantiates discovery as a dynamic feature set: an extendable surrogate over a growing set of program features, so that newly discovered mechanisms enter the model as new coordinates (cf. the discovery operation of §2). As an ablation, we remove the discovery mechanism, keeping the feature set fixed from the first iteration onward. We also compare acquisition functions—EI, UCB, and the posterior mean alone. Best val_bpb by LDM-TTS (Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B) iteration                                                  

> 0.96 0.98 1.00 1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Converged region (40-100)
> 0.98 0.99 40 60 80 100
> N4H4 LCB Discovery
> N4H4 LCB No discovery
> N8H8 LCB Discovery
> N8H8 EI Discovery
> N8H8 Mean Discovery
> Iteration
> val_bpb
> LDM-TTS BoN N4H4 Acquisition: LCB (Discovery) LDM-TTS BoN N4H4 Acquisition: LCB (No discovery) LDM-TTS BoN N8H8 Acquisition: LCB (Discovery) LDM-TTS BoN N8H8 Acquisition: EI (Discovery) LDM-TTS BoN N8H8 Acquisition: Mean (Discovery) ReAct all data points

Figure 11: Test-time search ablation on autoresearch . Best validation val bpb found up to iteration t (lower is better). Solid curves are LDM-TTS variants; the dashed curve is a ReAct-style no-acquisition reference (Yao et al., 2023b); grey points are all evaluated candidate programs. Each LDM-TTS variant is named NmHn for its inner budget, where N is the number of candidate programs the LLM proposes, and H is the number of hypothesis/refinement branches each candidate is expanded into. 25 Figure 11 supports three conclusions. First, increasing the test-time search budget helps . The 

N8H8 curve reaches the best plateau, while the lower-budget N4H4 curves converge at a higher value; since the outer training budget is unchanged, the gain comes from spending more cheap computation before each expensive evaluation. Second, the discovery mechanism helps . Without it, the search converges at a higher plateau, confirming that expanding the search frontier— not merely searching harder within a fixed support—is what sustains improvement after local plateaus. Third, the acquisition function matters . Posterior-mean search is competitive early, when the most promising direction is already known, but it plateaus above both EI and UCB. EI improves on mean-only selection by rewarding improvement over the incumbent, while UCB performs best because it deliberately allocates part of the test-time budget to under-modelled program families. Overall, these uncertainty-aware acquisitions consistently outperform the exploitation-only posterior mean. These results validate the central claim of §3: the LLM is the semantic search engine, but the calibrated, uncertainty-aware acquisition is what makes additional test-time compute useful. Discovery is distinct from both the search budget and the acquisition function. The ReAct-style no-acquisition reference (dashed, Figure 11) already shows that removing the acquisition value degrades search, and removing the discovery mechanism confines the search to a fixed support; neither reaches LDM’s frontier. We push this further in Appendix D.1: the pure LLM research loop—the η = 0 limit of Eq. (3), with no surrogate, no acquisition, and no uncertainty signal— plateaus near val bpb ≈ 0.956 after 875 experiments, well above the LDM result of 0 .93421 (Figure 7). The bottleneck is not proposal expressivity, for the LLM can write useful training code and reflect on its own transcript; it is value. Without μt, σt, and at, the run log remains a narrative memory rather than a searchable value landscape. We run the same budget and acquisition sweeps for the molecular and antibody design tasks of 

§6.1.3 and §6.1.2, with full results in Appendix D.2.1 and D.2.2. For molecular design, larger search budgets yield more effective discovery. The pattern is weaker for antibody design, where the scaling effect is small even though the optimum remains target-dependent across antigens (Appendix D.2.2); a likely explanation is that the open-source LLM provides only weak sequence-level priors in this domain. Across acquisition functions, well-chosen acquisitions give consistent gains in both domains once the search budget is sufficiently large. Notably, the mean acquisition (a 0 .5/0.5 scalarisation of the Vina and activity objectives) outperforms EHVI under low search budgets for molecular design: EHVI scores candidates against the current Pareto front, so it needs a large screening pool to be informative, whereas scalarised acquisitions do not and remain effective when the pool is small. 

6.2.2 Hyperparameter sensitivity 

We next study the sensitivity of LDM to its sampling and acquisition temperatures on the KRAS G12D molecular design task of §6.1.3. The LLM sampling temperature TLLM controls the diversity of LLM-generated SMILES candidates, while the acquisition temperature η controls the strength of acquisition-guided selection. As η → 0 the policy collapses to the raw LLM reservoir and as η → ∞ it reduces to acquisition-function argmax ( η = ∞ in the experiments below). For the LLM sampling temperature ablation, we fix η = 1 and vary the LLM-decoding tem-perature TLLM in {0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1, 1.25 }. As shown in Figure 12a, increasing TLLM generally improves the final optimisation performance: the setting TLLM = 1 .25 achieves the highest final hypervolume, while lower temperatures degrade performance. For the acquisition temperature ablation, we fix TLLM = 1 and vary η ∈ { 0, 0.5, 1, ∞} . Figure 12b shows that increasing η

generally improves the final hypervolume. Overall, on molecular design, both sufficient LLM exploration and effective acquisition guidance are necessary for LDM, with the acquisition tilt 26 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80                                   

> Number of evaluations
> 0510 15 20 25 30
> Hypervolume of Pareto front (higher is better)
> Temperature Sweep: Hypervolume by Number of Evaluations
> Final value +/-est. std T=1.25: 27.376 +/-1.808 (eval 80, n=5) T=1.00: 24.843 +/-4.173 (eval 80, n=5) T=0.75: 20.749 +/-6.527 (eval 80, n=5) T=0.50: 17.030 +/-8.724 (eval 80, n=5) T=0.25: 16.077 +/-3.843 (eval 80, n=5)
> T=1.25 T=1.00 T=0.75 T=0.50 T=0.25

(a) Effect of LLM sampling temperature TLLM 

with fixed acquisition temperature η = 1. 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80                                           

> Number of evaluations
> 0510 15 20 25 30
> Hypervolume of Pareto front (higher is better)
> EHVI Tilt Sweep: Hypervolume by Number of Evaluations
> Final value +/-est. std eta= +∞:27.560 +/-5.665 (eval 80, n=5) eta=2.0: 27.543 +/-3.434 (eval 80, n=5) eta=1.0: 24.843 +/-4.173 (eval 80, n=5) eta=0.5: 23.686 +/-4.753 (eval 80, n=5) eta=0.0: 23.088 +/-1.321 (eval 80, n=5) eta=4.0: 22.069 +/-7.329 (eval 80, n=5)
> eta= +∞
> eta=2.0 eta=1.0 eta=0.5 eta=0.0 eta=4.0

(b) Effect of acquisition temperature η with fixed LLM sampling temperature TLLM = 1. 

Figure 12: Hyperparameter ablations of LDM-TTS on molecular design. Each curve reports the hypervolume of the Pareto front over the evaluation trajectory. Higher values indicate better multi-objective optimisation performance. 

η acting as the dominant driver of final Pareto-front expansion. Antibody CDRH3 design ( §6.1.2) exhibits a different sensitivity pattern. The open-source LLM provides relatively weak sequence-level priors for this domain, so directly generated candidates are often uninformative in the large combinatorial search space. Policy-based LDM mitigates this limitation by using the LLM to parameterise a search region and then generating a larger candidate pool within that region. As a result, performance is less sensitive to additional test-time reweighting through the sampling and acquisition temperatures. This is consistent with the results in §6.1.2, where policy-mode LDM outperforms direct generation primarily through structured search-space parameterisation rather than strong sequence-level priors or aggressive acquisition weighting. Full temperature ablations for antibody design are provided in Appendix D.3. 

6.3 Performance Comparison with Baselines 

We now compare LDM against the relevant baselines in each domain, focusing on the final optimisation curves. 

6.3.1 AutoResearch 

On autoresearch , the example trajectory in Figure 7 (Section 6.1.1) already contrasts the LDM against the original Karpathy LLM-only loop under an identical H100 five-minute-per-run schedule: the no-discover baseline plateaus at val bpb ≈ 0.9767 after roughly 255 runs, while LDM continues to 0 .93421 . Relative to the shared val bpb = 1 .0069 starting point, LDM reduces validation BPB by 0 .0727, a 2 .4× larger reduction than the LLM-only baseline’s 0.0301. Separately, a matched-hardware leaderboard run on B200 reaches val bpb = 0 .902291 in 59 runs, compared with forge (0 .9264) and overmind (0 .9274) on the autoresearch@home 

leaderboard. 2 These improvements must come from processing more tokens or learning more effectively from each token under the fixed training-time budget; Table 1 attributes them to the retained program changes. 

2https://www.ensue-network.ai/lab/autoresearch 

27 6.3.2 Antibody CDRH3 design 

The baseline methods considered in this study can be grouped into four categories: Pure LLM 

approaches, which perform direct autoregressive sequence generation; combinatorial Bayesian optimisation (BO) frameworks ( TURBO , COMBO ) that have been adapted to operate over discrete sequence spaces; the domain-specialised optimiser AntBO ; and a naive random search strategy. Our goal is to position LDM as a competitive, general-purpose optimisation method-ology, rather than to claim superiority over the domain-specialised AntBO approach. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Evaluation index 

−120 −110 −100 −90 −80 −70 −60 −50                          

> Best-so-far ΔG (lower = better)
> Pure LLM: -95.5 ±0.7 TURBO: -101.6 ±3.1 COMBO: -93.7 ±4.3 AntBO: -110.1 ±1.5 LDM_Policy_Softmax: -106.7 ±4.1 LDM_Policy_Max: -110.8 ±0.9 LDM_Direct_Softmax: -94.2 ±4.7 LDM_Direct_Max: -96.7 ±2.6

1ADQ_A 

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Evaluation index 

−120 −110 −100 −90 −80 −70 −60 −50                          

> Best-so-far ΔG (lower = better)
> Pure LLM: -91.4 ±3.6 TURBO: -101.7 ±2.5 COMBO: -89.1 ±2.8 AntBO: -113.6 ±2.0 LDM_Policy_Softmax: -108.5 ±7.0 LDM_Policy_Max: -113.1 ±1.6 LDM_Direct_Softmax: -91.2 ±2.8 LDM_Direct_Max: -96.2 ±1.5

1FBI_X 

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Evaluation index 

−100 −90 −80 −70 −60 −50                          

> Best-so-far ΔG (lower = better)
> Pure LLM: -82.6 ±0.6 TURBO: -85.4 ±2.5 COMBO: -83.7 ±2.7 AntBO: -92.1 ±3.7 LDM_Policy_Softmax: -91.6 ±4.0 LDM_Policy_Max: -93.5 ±2.6 LDM_Direct_Softmax: -82.6 ±2.8 LDM_Direct_Max: -84.7 ±1.9

1H0D_C 

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Evaluation index 

−110 −100 −90 −80 −70 −60 −50                          

> Best-so-far ΔG (lower = better)
> Pure LLM: -87.7 ±2.6 TURBO: -97.7 ±2.5 COMBO: -90.3 ±4.3 AntBO: -104.6 ±2.6 LDM_Policy_Softmax: -104.7 ±1.0 LDM_Policy_Max: -104.1 ±0.6 LDM_Direct_Softmax: -90.0 ±2.6 LDM_Direct_Max: -91.8 ±2.9

1NSN_S 

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Evaluation index 

−120 −110 −100 −90 −80 −70 −60 −50                          

> Best-so-far ΔG (lower = better)
> Pure LLM: -91.1 ±1.0 TURBO: -100.9 ±3.4 COMBO: -93.8 ±3.5 AntBO: -107.7 ±4.3 LDM_Policy_Softmax: -108.4 ±1.7 LDM_Policy_Max: -108.4 ±1.4 LDM_Direct_Softmax: -94.7 ±2.0 LDM_Direct_Max: -97.8 ±1.5

1OB1_C 

Antibody design comparison across five antigens 

Pure LLM TURBO COMBO AntBO LDM_Policy_Softmax LDM_Policy_Max LDM_Direct_Softmax LDM_Direct_Max 

Figure 13: Binding affinity performance across five antibody antigens. Axes: horizontal = num-ber of sequence evaluations; vertical = best-so-far binding energy score (lower values indicate stronger binding). Curves correspond to all tested baselines and LDM variants. Figure 13 compares all methods across the five protein targets. Policy-based LDM variants con-sistently outperform direct generation variants, achieving affinity levels comparable to AntBO, while Direct variants perform only marginally better than standalone LLMs. Protein fitness landscapes are sparse and rugged, restricting the utility of small batches of directly generated sequences; even post-hoc acquisition reweighting cannot recover promising candidates the LLM fails to propose. In contrast, policy-mode LDM uses the LLM to define where to search rather than to emit final sequences, while the surrogate selects which candidates 28 to evaluate; this expands the candidate pool without additional oracle calls. 

6.3.3 Small-molecule drug discovery 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70                        

> Evaluation index
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35
> Hypervolume of Pareto front (higher is better)
> Final value +/-est. std Pure LLM: 16.826 +/-3.085 MOBO: 16.751 +/-2.562 Random Search: 13.794 +/-3.054 LDM (Direct-Softmax): 27.325 +/-5.475 LDM (Reasyn-Softmax): 21.707 +/-3.676
> Hypervolume of Pareto Front by Number of Evaluations
> Pure LLM MOBO Random Search LDM (Direct-Softmax) LDM (Reasyn-Softmax)

Figure 14: Pareto hypervolume growth for molecular design. Horizontal axis = evaluation count; vertical axis = dominated hypervolume of the Pareto front (higher values denote better multi-objective trade-offs). Separate curves track performance of random search, standard MOBO, and the two LDM variants. Baselines include random search and vanilla multi-objective Bayesian optimisation (MOBO), which also uses independent GPs and an EHVI acquisition function. Since the SMILES space is unbounded, for both baselines, we maintain a dynamic candidate pool. Specifically, starting from a set of seeding SMILES, we iteratively employ ReaSyn on historical SMILES (uniformly chosen in random search, and the historical best in MOBO), and add the generated analogues to the current pool. Figure 14 shows that both LDM variants outperform all baselines by a substantial margin, with Direct-Softmax delivering the strongest hypervolume gains. Conventional MOBO plateaus after roughly 40 evaluations, trapped within limited chemical regions, while direct LLM generation sustains steady front expansion across the full budget. The performance gap between the two LDM variants arises from a breadth–synthesizability trade-off. General-purpose LLMs carry broad pre-training knowledge of diverse SMILES struc-tures; large-batch direct generation unlocks wider scaffold exploration. ReaSyn’s local analogue generation improves synthetic tractability but restricts structural diversity, slowing Pareto ex-pansion for early-stage lead discovery where novel scaffolds are prioritised. 

6.4 Learning Discovery Experience with Fine-Tuning 

We evaluate discovery fine-tuning across three structured design domains: multi-turn program search in AutoResearch, combinatorial antibody CDRH3 design, and multi-objective molecular discovery. In every experiment, the fine-tuned proposer is placed inside the same acquisition-guided LDM loop as the base proposer. Fine-tuning therefore changes the proposal reservoir, whereas the online surrogate continues to provide value and uncertainty estimates from the current experimental history. We compare action-only discovery fine-tuning with reasoning-augmented fine-tuning. The latter trains the proposer to generate a surrogate-grounded research-progress rationale before emitting the candidate action. 29 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80                     

> LDM-TTS iteration
> 0.980 0.985 0.990 0.995 1.000 1.005
> Best val_bpb (lower is better)
> Final best val_bpb 0.9788 Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) 0.9829 Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) 0.9825 Base Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) 0.9965 Base Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) 0.9801 Qwen3-Coder-30B reference
> nanoGPT (autoresearch): best val_bpb vs. LDM-TTS iteration
> Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Base Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) Base Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Qwen3-Coder-30B reference

Figure 15: Reasoning-augmentation ablation on AutoResearch. Best validation bits-per-byte (lower is better) versus LDM-TTS iteration inside an identical acquisition-guided loop, comparing fine-tuned and base proposers with and without reasoning augmentation and the Qwen3-Coder-30B reference. 

6.4.1 AutoResearch 

We first study fine-tuning in AutoResearch, where an agent repeatedly edits a persistent training program and evaluates each proposal through a fixed-budget nanoGPT training run. This setting requires the model to interpret an evolving experiment ledger, recognise performance plateaus, and propose changes that test new program mechanisms. Figure 15 compares fine-tuned and base Qwen3.5-9B proposers over 80 LDM-TTS iterations. The reasoning-augmented fine-tuned model achieves the best validation performance, reaching val bpb = 0 .9788, lower than the Qwen3-Coder-30B reference at 0 .9801. Fine-tuning without reasoning reaches 0 .9829, the base model with reasoning reaches 0 .9825, and the base model without reasoning stalls at 0 .9965. These results indicate that fine-tuning enhances the quality and diversity of the program-search reservoir, and that the explicit trace of research progress further facilitates the model’s ability to escape local program families and explore a broader region of the program space. 

6.4.2 Antibody CDRH3 Design 

We next evaluate antibody CDRH3 design, where the proposer searches a sparse and rugged sequence space under a limited binding-energy evaluation budget. We compare fine-tuned and base Qwen3.5-9B models with and without reasoning augmentation across five antigens. All variants use the same acquisition-guided LDM loop with expected-improvement acquisition and the same parallel evaluation budget. Figure 16 shows that fine-tuning improves over the corresponding base proposer across the five antigens. Both fine-tuned variants achieve lower binding energies than the base models, while the reasoning-augmented fine-tuned model obtains the lowest average binding energy among the four configurations. This result indicates that the distilled policy improves sequence-family proposals even in a large discrete design space. 30 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                 

> Number of evaluations
> 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best binding energy (lower is better)
> 1ADQ_A (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best binding energy (lower is better)
> 1FBI_X (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> 95
> 90
> 85
> 80
> 75
> 70
> 65
> 60
> 55
> Best binding energy (lower is better)
> 1H0D_C (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best binding energy (lower is better)
> 1NSN_S (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best binding energy (lower is better)
> 1OB1_C (CDRH3 length 11)
> Base Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) Base Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT)
> Antibody CDRH3 design: fine-tuning with/without chain-of-thought vs. base Qwen3.5-9B

Figure 16: Discovery fine-tuning for antibody CDRH3 design. Best Absolut! bind-ing energy, lower is better, versus the number of evaluations across five antigens. Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B variants with and without reasoning augmentation are compared with their corre-sponding base proposers in the same acquisition-guided LDM loop. Shaded bands denote mean 

± standard deviation across available seeds. 

6.4.3 Multi-objective Small-Molecule Discovery 

Finally, we evaluate cross-task transfer on the KRAS G12D molecular-design task. The task jointly optimises docking and neural activity, and performance is measured by best-so-far Pareto-front hypervolume over 80 expensive evaluations. Figure 17 compares five inference-time policies inside the same LDM loop. The reasoning-augmented fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B model achieves the highest final hypervolume, 26 .660 ±2.608. It exceeds the same fine-tuned student without reasoning, 22 .279 ± 3.828, and both DeepSeek V4 Flash teacher variants, which reach 24 .548 ±3.589 with reasoning and 23 .582 ±2.832 without reasoning. The untuned Qwen3.5-9B base proposer reaches 16 .489 ± 5.867. The result shows that the distilled policy transfers beyond the source task and that reasoning augmentation improves this transfer, although the intervals overlap. 

6.4.4 Out-of-distribution Generalisation 

The fine-tuned policy transfers not only across the source task but also to unseen targets and tasks. In a case-level study, we hold two of the five antibody targets ( 1FBI X , 1H0D C ) out of training entirely, fine-tune on the other three, and evaluate on the held-out pair inside the same acquisition-guided loop. Figure 18 shows that this out-of-distribution model matches or exceeds the in-distribution model (which was trained on these antigens) on both held-out targets, and clearly beats the base proposer. In a more demanding task-level study, we remove the entire protein task from training and fine-tune only on the nanoGPT and small-molecule trajectories; Figure 19 shows that this model, which has never seen an antibody, matches the in-distribution model on four of the five targets. Since these models never observed the test antigens, the gains cannot be memorisation—the distilled acquisition policy itself generalises. The quantitative details and analysis of both studies are reported in Appendix E. 31 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 

Number of evaluations 

0510 15 20 25 30 35                                                   

> Hypervolume of Pareto front (higher is better)
> Final value +/-est. std Ours (Fine-tuned Qwen3.5 9B, with_cot): 26.660 +/-2.608 (eval 80, n=5) DeepSeek V4 Flash (with_o_cot): 24.548 +/-3.589 (eval 80, n=5) DeepSeek V4 Flash (with_cot): 23.582 +/-2.832 (eval 80, n=4) Ours (Fine-tuned Qwen3.5 9B, with_o_cot): 22.279 +/-3.828 (eval 80, n=5) Qwen3.5 9B (with_o_cot): 16.489 +/-5.867 (eval 80, n=5)

KRAS G12D: Hypervolume by Number of Evaluations 

> Ours (Fine-tuned Qwen3.5 9B, with_cot) DeepSeek V4 Flash (with_o_cot) DeepSeek V4 Flash (with_cot) Ours (Fine-tuned Qwen3.5 9B, with_o_cot) Qwen3.5 9B (with_o_cot)

Figure 17: Fine-tuning with reasoning-augmented discovery data on KRAS G12D. 

Best-so-far Pareto-front hypervolume (higher is better) versus the number of expensive eval-uations, comparing fine-tuned and base proposers inside the same LDM loop. Shaded bands denote one standard deviation. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Number of evaluations 

110 

100 

90 

80 

70 

60 

> Best binding energy (lower is better)

1FBI_X (held-out) 

> Base Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) Base Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Fine-tuned+CoT, in-distribution Fine-tuned+CoT, OOD (never saw antigen)

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Number of evaluations 

95 

90 

85 

80 

75 

70 

65 

60 

55 

> Best binding energy (lower is better)

1H0D_C (held-out) 

> Base Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) Base Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Fine-tuned+CoT, in-distribution Fine-tuned+CoT, OOD (never saw antigen)

OOD generalisation: mixed-task fine-tuning, 2 held-out antigens (3-train/2-test) 

Figure 18: Out-of-distribution generalisation to held-out antigens (3-train/2-test). 

Best binding energy versus number of evaluations on the two held-out antigens. The mixed-task fine-tuned model evaluated on antigens it never saw during training (red) matches or exceeds the in-distribution fine-tuned model (teal) and clearly beats base Qwen3.5-9B with and without chain-of-thought (dashed). Across programs, biological sequences, and molecules, fine-tuning improves the proposal reser-voir within the online LDM loop. The gains are strongest when the model is trained to represent not only the next action but also the surrogate-grounded rationale for why that action advances scientific search, and they persist for targets and tasks that the distilled policy never encountered during training. 32 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                 

> Number of evaluations
> −110
> −100
> −90
> −80
> −70 Best binding energy (lower better)
> 1ADQ_A (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> −110
> −100
> −90
> −80
> −70
> −60 Best binding energy (lower better)
> 1FBI_X (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> −95
> −90
> −85
> −80
> −75
> −70
> −65
> −60
> −55 Best binding energy (lower better)
> 1H0D_C (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> −100
> −90
> −80
> −70 Best binding energy (lower better)
> 1NSN_S (CDRH3 length 11)
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Number of evaluations
> −110
> −100
> −90
> −80
> −70
> −60 Best binding energy (lower better)
> 1OB1_C (CDRH3 length 11)
> Base Qwen3.5-9B (with CoT) Base Qwen3.5-9B (no CoT) Fine-tuned+CoT, in-distribution Task-OOD (never saw protein task)
> Task-level OOD: model trained only on nanoGPT + small-molecule, tested on antibody design (3 seeds)

Figure 19: Task-level out-of-distribution generalisation. Best binding energy versus num-ber of evaluations on all five antibody targets. The task-level model (red) was fine-tuned on 

only the nanoGPT and small-molecule trajectories and never saw the protein task, yet inside the antibody acquisition loop it matches or exceeds the in-distribution fine-tuned model (teal) on four targets ( 1FBI X , 1ADQ A , 1OB1 C , 1NSN S ) and clearly beats base Qwen3.5-9B with and without chain-of-thought (dashed). The exception is 1H0D C , whose narrow optimum requires 

de novo motif design rather than candidate selection, the one capability that needs in-domain knowledge. 

6.5 Overall Discussion 

Across all three experimental domains, our evaluation identifies four consistent properties of the LDM framework, aligned with the states of scientific knowledge in §2. First, the case studies in §6.1 consistently reproduce the exploit-explore-discover cycle defined in the LDM. In every domain, surrogate-guided optimisation delivers rapid initial gains be-fore reaching a local plateau. The LDM detects stagnation and triggers a discovery step that expands or revises the active search space: new program mechanisms in autoresearch , new sequence families in antibody design, and new molecular scaffolds in small-molecule discovery. Performance improvement resumes after each search-space revision. This plateau-and-revision pattern distinguishes LDM from standard Bayesian optimisation, which operates on a fixed, pre-defined design space. Second, the ablation studies in §6.2 isolate the individual contributions of three core compo-nents. Increasing the test-time search budget improves performance only when candidates are selected by a calibrated, uncertainty-aware acquisition function, not by raw LLM likelihood alone. Acquisition functions that balance exploitation and exploration (EI, UCB) consistently outperform the purely exploitative posterior mean. The discovery mechanism is an independent, necessary component: when disabled, search is confined to a fixed feature set and converges prematurely to a worse plateau. This confirms that expanding the search frontier, rather than only refining within a fixed space, drives sustained improvement in large, open-ended design problems. Third, the baseline comparisons in §6.3 show that combining Bayesian surrogate acquisition with 33 LLM-driven proposal generation yields competitive performance across all three domains. The optimal LDM variant is domain-dependent: policy-mode LDM performs best in antibody de-sign, where it expands candidate coverage via structured search-space parameterisation; direct-generation LDM performs best in code and molecular design, where the LLM’s pre-trained priors provide strong structural guidance. The unified tilted-distribution framework supports both modes without changes to the core acquisition logic. Fourth, the fine-tuning experiments in §6.4 demonstrate that the LDM search policy can be distilled into the LLM reservoir. Fine-tuning improves proposal quality across all domains, with further gains from reasoning-augmented training that includes surrogate-grounded rationales. The distilled policy generalises out-of-distribution to unseen targets and entirely unseen tasks, indicating that it learns a general search strategy rather than memorising task-specific designs. Taken together, these results frame scientific design as a sequential decision problem, rather than a pure prediction problem. The LLM constructs and adapts candidate proposals, while the surrogate and acquisition function allocate limited evaluation budget to the most infor-mative candidates. Limitations of the current framework include the cubic scaling of exact Gaussian processes with observation count, and the risk of surrogate misspecification or reward exploitation. Future work will address scalability to larger experimental budgets and more robust surrogate modelling. 

## 7 Related Work 

This section situates the LDMs within the broader literature on generative models, statisti-cal optimisation, and their intersection for scientific discovery. The aim is not to provide an exhaustive survey, but a focused positioning of LDM within the key strands of related work that directly motivate its design and delineate its contributions. We structure the discussion in three parts. We first review the remarkable progress in LLMs, including their scaling laws, emergent reasoning capabilities, and post-training methods; we then highlight the limitations of pure generative models for discovery, particularly the lack of calibrated uncertainty and ex-pensive, sparse reward signals. Next, we survey the statistical learning paradigm for scientific discovery, from multi-armed bandits to Bayesian optimisation (BO), and discuss its strengths and challenges in high-dimensional or open-ended, unrepresented scientific spaces. Finally, we examine the growing body of work on hybrid approaches that combine LLMs with BO, clarify the differences between LDM and the most closely related methods, and articulate the open problems our framework addresses. 

7.1 Large Language Models and Their Limitations in Scientific Discovery 

The early development of language models was marked by several landmark architectures, in-cluding the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), GPT-1 (Radford et al., 2018), and BERT (De-vlin et al., 2019). The past few years have witnessed transformative progress in large language models. Scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020) have established a predictable correlation in LLMs’ performance with the scale of model weights, data, and test-time compute. The remarkable success of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) further propelled research along the scaling direction. As models scale, they exhibit emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022) not present in smaller counter-parts, including complex reasoning via chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2023; Kojima et al., 2023), in-context learning (Han et al., 2025), and instruction following (Ouyang et al., 2022). In addition, post-training methods, such as supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforce-ment learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), can better adapt LLMs to downstream tasks and the users’ preferences. 34 Since 2023, Test-time compute has been a crucial development that pushes LLMs from language understanding to reasoners for complex problems, where the key insight is that the use of ad-ditional computation at inference time greatly improves output quality. Early research utilises verifiers (Cobbe et al., 2021; Lightman et al., 2023) to guide reasoning to solve complex mathe-matical problems. Further, tree of thoughts (Yao et al., 2023a) performs deliberate search over intermediate reasoning states with self-evaluation. Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) iterates generate–critique–revise cycles. More generally, Snell et al. (2025) show that optimal allocation of test-time compute allows small models to outperform much larger models. The underlying search machinery, including UCT (Kocsis and Szepesv´ ari, 2006) and the PUCT rule popularised by AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017), has been applied to LLM decoding and training (Feng et al., 2024b). The combination of inference-time search with verifier-guided refinement underpins renowned systems such as OpenAI’s o1 (OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI, 2025). When cheap supervision is repeatedly available, reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards 

(RLVR) (DeepSeek-AI, 2025; Shao et al., 2024) has led to impressive results in mathematics, coding, and reasoning tasks. A unified tutorial perspective on these methods is provided by Wang (2025), and OpenR (Wang et al., 2024) further establishes a comprehensive technical framework. Despite the significant progress of LLM reasoning, how LLMs engage in open-ended scientific discovery remains questionable. Studies show that LLMs are also poorly calibrated for scientific decisions—their internal confidence does not reliably reflect uncertainty about an external prop-erty (Gupta et al., 2025; Kristiadi et al., 2024). Moreover, end-to-end execution benchmarks consistently show that frontier LLM agents cannot yet reliably discover novel, high-quality so-lutions: on ResearchClawBench the strongest autonomous agent scores only 21.5/50 across 40 real-paper-derived tasks (Xu et al., 2026), and on PaperBench agents replicate ICML papers at 21.0% against 41.4% by PhD researchers (Starace et al., 2025). Even at the ideation stage, novelty rankings that initially favour LLMs (Si et al., 2024) reverse once ideas are executed (Si et al., 2025). LLM-generated ideas also exhibit narrow exploration, converging on the centroid of existing literature (Tang and Yang, 2026). Therefore, scientific discovery essentially requires a novel paradigm of foundation models. Cru-cially, the key challenge is not intrinsic LLM failures: when proposals are paired with automated evaluators and search, genuinely novel results are recovered (Novikov et al., 2025). The bottle-neck is the absence of a calibrated external value signal. Test-time compute and reinforcement learning typically rely on cheap verifiers or reward models, such as ground-truth answers or trained networks from large data, to guide the search of reasoning steps. This is built upon ac-cess to rich feedback data or ground-truth answers, which, however, is usually scarce in scientific domains. 

7.2 Statistical Learning for Scientific Discovery 

A mature body of statistical learning approaches addresses the problem of optimising a black-box reward function with noisy evaluations. Multi-arm bandit constitutes a representative frame-work conceptualising the exploration–exploitation trade-off (Lattimore and Szepesv´ ari, 2020), where the upper confidence bound (UCB) (Auer, 2002) provides a simple way to balance these competing objectives with sublinear regret guarantees. However, classical multi-arm bandit settings assume a finite set of arms, yet scientific design spaces are often effectively unbounded. This challenge of unbounded space is then captured by the infinitely-armed bandit (Berry et al., 1997; Wang et al., 2008) frameworks, where new arms must be discovered from a reservoir . The performance in such settings is governed by the reservoir’s tail of near-optimal arms, a quantity known as the discovery gap . The LDM framework explicitly adopts this view, treating the LLM as an adaptive reservoir and analysing the discovery gap through a missing-mass argument 35 (McAllester and Schapire, 2000; Berend and Kontorovich, 2013) in § 5. In comparison, LDM utilises an LLM as its reservoir, endowing the search process with broad scientific priors and rich semantic knowledge to inform candidate generation. In addition, the LLM’s context Ct

encapsulates the full evaluation history, enabling in-context learning to synthesise insights from prior trials and propose progressively more effective candidate designs. The regret analysis in 

§ 5 decomposes the cost of search into a surrogate-estimation term and a reservoir-quality term, with the latter shrinking as more inference-time compute is spent. Scientific discovery tasks are further constrained by costly evaluation procedures and limited computational budget. This demand motivates model-based bandit variants that explicitly extract knowledge from evaluation history and make the most of such knowledge in decision making. To this end, Bayesian optimisation (BO) (Mockus, 1975; Jones et al., 1998; Garnett, 2023) provides a powerful framework for such a variant that uses a probabilistic surrogate following the rigour of Bayesian inference, where typically a Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006) serves as the surrogate. The GP provides predictive mean and variance, which are combined into an acquisition function that guides the selection of the next evaluation. For example, canonical implementations such as Efficient Global Optimisation (EGO) (Jones et al., 1998) and GP-UCB (Srinivas et al., 2010) use expected improvement (EI) and UCB (Auer, 2002) as their acquisition function, respectively. Theoretical analysis shows that GP-UCB enjoys sublinear cumulative regret in terms of the maximum information gain, a measure of how informative the observations are about the objective (Srinivas et al., 2010). These theoretical guarantees make BO a principled tool for experimental design for scientific discovery (Yu et al., 2026). BO has been successfully applied across chemistry, materials science, and biology, often requiring domain-specific adaptations. Examples include the PHOENICS (H¨ ase et al., 2018) and Gryffin (H¨ ase et al., 2021) frameworks for chemical discovery. Combinatorial BO frameworks such as AntBO (Khan et al., 2022) have been developed to handle the discrete sequence space of CDRH3 loops for antibody design. Benchmarking studies across multiple materials domains (Liang et al., 2021) have compared different surrogate models and acquisition functions, while applications in chemical synthesis (Shields et al., 2021) and material discovery (Shoyeb Raihan et al., 2024) further demonstrate the versatility of BO. For a comprehensive overview of BO for chemical problems, see (Wu et al., 2024). To search among discrete sequences (e.g., SMILES and proteins), methods such as BOSS (Bayesian Optimisation over String Spaces) (Moss et al., 2020) use string kernels to directly construct GPs over the string space. To handle molecule design, latent-space approaches combine variational autoencoders with BO, though they struggle with validity and out-of-distribution generation (Griffiths and Hern´ andez-Lobato, 2020). COMBO uses a graph Cartesian product to define a Gaussian-process BO method for combinatorial variables (Oh et al., 2019); the later MCBO framework provides benchmarks for combinatorial and mixed-variable BO (Dreczkowski et al., 2023). For multi-objective BO, model-assisted S-metric selection (Ponweiser et al., 2008) and EHVI (Emmerich et al., 2011) both build on hypervolume, while qEHVI/NEHVI address parallel and noisy settings (Daulton et al., 2020, 2021). Despite these advances, pure statistical methods face fundamental challenges. First, they strug-gle to propose valid candidates in vast, unbounded spaces of practical scientific problems. Next, they cannot easily incorporate high-level semantic domain knowledge. Additionally, they are often unresponsive to user-specified design constraints or preferences. These limitations create a natural opportunity for complementarity with generative models, which can propose semanti-cally meaningful candidates and be steered by domain knowledge. This brings us to the growing body of hybrid approaches that combine the strengths of LLMs and BO. 36 7.3 Hybrid Approaches: LLM-Guided Discovery 

The recognition that LLMs and statistical learning offer complementary strengths has led to a growing body of hybrid methods. A high-level approach is OPRO (Yang et al., 2024), which uses an LLM as an optimiser by describing the task in natural language and iteratively generating solutions from a prompt containing a history of solution–score pairs. While powerful in prompt optimisation, OPRO lacks the calibrated uncertainty and principled exploration of a Bayesian surrogate. Several works have integrated LLMs directly into the BO pipeline. LLAMBO (Liu et al., 2024) uses LLMs for zero-shot warm-starting, surrogate modelling, and candidate sampling, showing gains in low-data hyperparameter optimisation regimes. BoChemian (Rankovic and Schwaller, 2023) and its extension (Rankovi´ c et al., 2025) use LLM embeddings as features for BO over chemical reactions, demonstrating that fine-tuning LLMs with uncertainty-aware objectives can improve discovery rates. LABO (Chen et al., 2026) proposes a gating criterion to dynamically balance LLM predictions against experimental observations. Other works use LLMs to generate or refine kernels for GP surrogates (Suwandi et al., 2025), handle natural language feedback (Ramos et al., 2023), or perform analog circuit design (Yin et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). The LLM-as-warm-start paradigm, where the LLM suggests the initial candidates or a search region, is also explored in (Ramos et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2024). In catalysis, Ramos et al. (2023) use frozen LLMs for in-context learning to enable BO without feature engineering, demonstrating the potential of LLMs to operate directly in language space. Despite various attempts to combine the advantages of LLMs and BO, some recent studies have challenged their solidity. A sobering perspective is provided by Gupta et al. (2025), who find that current LLMs show no sensitivity to experimental feedback in BO tasks, and classical methods such as linear bandits and GP optimisation consistently outperform LLM agents. Similarly, Kristiadi et al. (2024) take a dispassionate stance, concluding that uncertainty taken directly from point-estimated LLMs is unreliable, and that LLMs are useful for BO over molecules primarily only when they serve as fixed feature extractors for principled GP surrogates and are pretrained or finetuned on domain-specific data. These critiques directly motivate LDM’s design: we retain an explicit calibrated posterior (the GP surrogate) and use the LLM only as a candidate reservoir. Another closely related work to LDM is dLLM (Yuan et al., 2026), which for offline black-box optimisation runs a masked-diffusion tree search where leaf candidates are scored by expected improvement under a GP fitted to an offline dataset. In contrast, LDM targets the standard 

online recurrent loop with sequential, expensive evaluations. The core is that LDM must raise designs that are valuable not only for the current trial but also for gaining knowledge for the future. In summary, LLMs provide powerful generative priors but lack calibration and robust optimisa-tion; meanwhile, statistical methods provide principled, uncertainty-aware search but struggle to propose candidates in semantic, combinatorial spaces. LDM bridges this gap by making the acquisition function the value signal of an LLM-driven inference-time search, creating a principled, model-based framework for scientific discovery. 

## 8 Conclusion, Limitations, and Outlook 

The core challenge of scientific discovery lies in searching for optimal solutions within vast, structured, and open-ended design spaces under a limited budget of costly evaluations. Existing paradigms exhibit complementary limitations: large language models (LLMs) possess strong structured generative capabilities and domain priors, but cannot reliably estimate the true 37 value of external objectives or their associated uncertainty. Bayesian optimisation, by contrast, delivers uncertainty-aware experimental decisions from sparse observations, yet struggles to autonomously propose valid candidates in complex discrete spaces. This work presents the Large Discovery Model (LDM), an experiment-grounded recurrent architecture that deeply couples the generative prior of LLMs with the value signal from a Gaussian process surrogate. Framing scientific design as a sequential inverse decision problem under an evaluation budget, LDM operates a closed loop of generation, evaluation, and update, which simultaneously expands the search frontier and allocates experimental resources precisely. At the theoretical and algorithmic level, LDM establishes a KL-regularised, acquisition-guided optimisation framework and derives a closed-form acquisition-tilted optimal search distribution. This formulation extends the classical dichotomy between exploitation and exploration into a tri-partite scientific search regime of exploitation, exploration and discovery, unifying the generative prior and empirical value signal within a single mathematical framework. We further provide a complete regret decomposition that delineates the roles of generative coverage gap, surrogate fitting error, and sampling strategy suboptimality. Algorithmically, the framework supports two candidate generation paradigms, direct generation and indirect parameterisation, and is complemented by a decomposed feedback mechanism to guide targeted iterative refinement, making it adaptable to design spaces of varying structure. Building on this core, we introduce a post-training amortisation scheme: through reasoning-augmented supervised fine-tuning, the high-budget test-time search policy is amortised into the model weights, substantially reducing inference-time computational cost while preserving search quality. Empirical evaluation across three heterogeneous domains, including the auto-research scenario of neural-network training program, antibody CDRH3 sequence design, and multi-objective molecular optimisation, systematically validates the generality of the LDM framework and its core findings. First, the structured generative capacity of LLMs and the uncertainty calibra-tion of Bayesian surrogates exhibit strong complementarity, with their integrated performance outperforming the reported LLM-only and BO-only baselines. Second, expansion of the search frontier is associated with improvements after observed local plateaus. Third, both test-time compute scaling and post-training fine-tuning improve search efficiency in the reported studies. Fine-tuning experiments further demonstrate stable gains across cross-target and cross-task transfer, indicating that the model learns generalisable discovery decision logic rather than task-specific memorisation. Nevertheless, the current framework is subject to several constraints and limitations. The Gaussian process surrogate incurs cubic computational complexity in the number of observa-tions, limiting its scalability under large experimental budgets. Test-time search relies on batch candidate sampling, which entails substantial LLM inference overhead. The kernel functions and feature representations of the surrogate still require manual customisation per domain, re-sulting in limited automation for cross-domain transfer. Additionally, framework performance is bounded by the coverage of the LLM’s pretrained domain knowledge; in domains with weak priors, it is difficult to achieve substantial superiority over specialised methods. Finally, the current closed loop is updated solely based on in-process experimental observations, and has not yet systematically incorporated existing external knowledge and data, leaving a large body of unknown knowns unutilised in the search process. For future work, a core direction is to address the utilisation of unknown knowns. We will introduce memory retrieval mechanisms and federated discovery frameworks to incorporate external knowledge bases, published experimental results, and data from parallel exploration processes into the search closed loop. Combined with techniques such as sparse Gaussian pro-cesses (Snelson and Ghahramani, 2005; Titsias, 2009), this will simultaneously address limited context capacity and high computational complexity as observational data scales. Building on this, we will explore end-to-end surrogate specification, in which the LLM autonomously learns 38 kernel functions and prior settings for the surrogate, eliminating manual adaptation across do-mains. We will also advance discovery-oriented post-training paradigms, exploring preference learning and reinforcement learning to further internalise acquisition-guided decision logic into the model’s generative distribution. 

## References 

Peter Auer. Using Confidence Bounds for Exploitation-Exploration Trade-offs. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3(Nov):397–422, 2002. ISSN 1533-7928. Maximilian Balandat, Brian Karrer, Daniel R. Jiang, Samuel Daulton, Benjamin Letham, An-drew Gordon Wilson, and Eytan Bakshy. BoTorch: A framework for efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,volume 33, 2020. Joeran Beel, Min-Yen Kan, and Moritz Baumgart. Evaluating sakana’s AI scientist: Bold claims, mixed results, and a promising future? ACM SIGIR Forum , 59(1):1–20, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3769733.3769747. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3769733.3769747 .Daniel Berend and Aryeh Kontorovich. On the concentration of the missing mass. Electronic Communications in Probability , 18:1–7, 2013. Donald A. Berry, Robert W. Chen, Alan Zame, David C. Heath, and Larry A. Shepp. Bandit problems with infinitely many arms. The Annals of Statistics , 25(5):2103–2116, 1997. Pier Giovanni Bissiri, Chris C. Holmes, and Stephen G. Walker. A general framework for updating belief distributions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 78(5):1103–1130, 2016. doi: 10.1111/rssb.12158. Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners, July 2020. S´ ebastien Bubeck, R´ emi Munos, Gilles Stoltz, and Csaba Szepesv´ ari. X-armed bandits. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12(46):1655–1695, 2011. Zhendong Cao and Lei Wang. Reinforcement fine-tuning for materials design. Physical Review B, 113(2):024106, 2026. Chih-Yu Chang, Milad Azvar, Chinedum Okwudire, and Raed Al Kontar. Llinbo: Trustworthy llm-in-the-loop bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14756 , 2025. Guojin Chen, Keren Zhu, Seunggeun Kim, Hanqing Zhu, Yao Lai, Bei Yu, and David Z. Pan. LLM-Enhanced Bayesian Optimization for Efficient Analog Layout Constraint Generation, December 2024. Zhuo Chen, Xinzhe Yuan, Jianshu Zhang, Jinzong Dong, Ruichen Zhou, Yingchun Niu, Tian-hang Zhou, Yu Yang Fredrik Liu, Yuqiang Li, Nanyang Ye, and Qinying Gu. LABO: LLM-Accelerated Bayesian Optimization through Broad Exploration and Selective Experimenta-tion, May 2026. 39 Sayak Ray Chowdhury and Aditya Gopalan. On kernelized multi-armed bandits. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 70 of PMLR ,pages 844–853, 2017. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems, November 2021. Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Differentiable expected hypervol-ume improvement for parallel multi-objective Bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33, 2020. Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Parallel Bayesian optimization of multiple noisy objectives with expected hypervolume improvement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 34, 2021. DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning, January 2025. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding, May 2019. Monroe D. Donsker and S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan. On a variational formula for the principal eigenvalue for operators with maximum principle. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 72(3):780–783, 1975. doi: 10.1073/pnas.72.3.780. Kamil Dreczkowski, Antoine Grosnit, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. Framework and Benchmarks for Combinatorial and Mixed-variable Bayesian Optimization. In 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2023. Michael T. M. Emmerich, Andr´ e H. Deutz, and Jan Willem Klinkenberg. Hypervolume-based expected improvement: Monotonicity properties and exact computation. In 2011 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) , pages 2147–2154, 2011. doi: 10.1109/CEC. 2011.5949880. Xidong Feng, Bo Liu, Yan Song, Haotian Fu, Ziyu Wan, Girish A Koushik, Zhiyuan Hu, Mengyue Yang, Ying Wen, and Jun Wang. Natural language reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14251 , 2024a. Xidong Feng, Ziyu Wan, Muning Wen, Stephen Marcus McAleer, Ying Wen, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Alphazero-like Tree-Search can Guide Large Language Model Decoding and Training, February 2024b. Peter I. Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02811 , 2018. Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2023. Ryan-Rhys Griffiths and Jos´ e Miguel Hern´ andez-Lobato. Constrained Bayesian optimization for automatic chemical design using variational autoencoders. Chemical Science , 11(2):577–586, 2020. ISSN 2041-6520. doi: 10.1039/c9sc04026a. Rushil Gupta, Jason Hartford, and Bang Liu. LLMs for Bayesian Optimization in Scientific Domains: Are We There Yet?, September 2025. Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine 

40 Learning Research , pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v80/haarnoja18b.html .Chi Han, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhao, and Heng Ji. Understanding Emergent In-Context Learning from a Kernel Regression Perspective, September 2025. Florian H¨ ase, Lo¨ ıc M. Roch, Christoph Kreisbeck, and Al´ an Aspuru-Guzik. Phoenics: ABayesian Optimizer for Chemistry. ACS Central Science , 4(9):1134–1145, September 2018. ISSN 2374-7943, 2374-7951. doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.8b00307. Florian H¨ ase, Matteo Aldeghi, Riley J. Hickman, Lo¨ ıc M. Roch, and Al´ an Aspuru-Guzik. Gryf-fin: An algorithm for Bayesian optimization of categorical variables informed by expert knowledge. Applied Physics Reviews , 8(3):031406, September 2021. ISSN 1931-9401. doi: 10.1063/5.0048164. Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. Efficient Global Optimization of Expensive Black-Box Functions. Journal of Global Optimization , 13(4):455–492, December 1998. ISSN 1573-2916. doi: 10.1023/A:1008306431147. Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models, January 2020. Andrej Karpathy. autoresearch: AI agents running research on single-GPU nanochat training automatically. https://github.com/karpathy/autoresearch , 2026. GitHub repository. Asif Khan, Alexander I. Cowen-Rivers, Antoine Grosnit, Derrick-Goh-Xin Deik, Philippe A. Robert, Victor Greiff, Eva Smorodina, Puneet Rawat, Kamil Dreczkowski, Rahmad Akbar, Rasul Tutunov, Dany Bou-Ammar, Jun Wang, Amos Storkey, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. AntBO: Towards real-world automated antibody design with combinatorial Bayesian optimi-sation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12570 , 2022. Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesv´ ari. Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning. In European Con-ference on Machine Learning (ECML) , pages 282–293, 2006. Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners, January 2023. Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Stochastic beams and where to find them: The Gumbel-top-k trick for sampling sequences without replacement. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3499–3508, 2019. Agustinus Kristiadi, Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Marta Skreta, Pascal Poupart, Al´ an Aspuru-Guzik, and Geoff Pleiss. A Sober Look at LLMs for Material Discovery: Are They Actually Good for Bayesian Optimization Over Molecules?, 2024. Mikael Krogerus and Roman Tsch¨ appeler. The Decision Book: Fifty Models for Strategic Think-ing . W. W. Norton & Company, New York, revised edition, 2018. ISBN 9780393652376. Varun Kumar, Abhinandan K. Danodia, Pradeep S. Jadhavar, Subhendu K. Mohanty, and Swapan K. Samanta. An overview of KRAS G12D inhibitors: Expanding the therapeutic frontier of KRAS in targeting KRAS G12D using diverse therapeutic modalities. European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 305:118555, March 2026. ISSN 0223-5234. doi: 10.1016/j. ejmech.2025.118555. 41 Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesv´ ari. Bandit Algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 1 edition, July 2020. ISBN 978-1-108-57140-1 978-1-108-48682-8. doi: 10.1017/9781108571401. Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00909 , 2018. Qiaohao Liang, Aldair E. Gongora, Zekun Ren, Armi Tiihonen, Zhe Liu, Shijing Sun, James R. Deneault, Daniil Bash, Flore Mekki-Berrada, Saif A. Khan, Kedar Hippalgaonkar, Benji Maruyama, Keith A. Brown, John Fisher Iii, and Tonio Buonassisi. Benchmarking the performance of Bayesian optimization across multiple experimental materials science do-mains. npj Computational Materials , 7(1):188, November 2021. ISSN 2057-3960. doi: 10.1038/s41524-021-00656-9. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s Verify Step by Step, May 2023. Tennison Liu, Nicol´ as Astorga, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Large Language Models to Enhance Bayesian Optimization, March 2024. Xuefeng Liu, Songhao Jiang, Siyu Chen, Zhuoran Yang, Yuxin Chen, Ian Foster, and Rick Stevens. Drugimprovergpt: A large language model for drug optimization with fine-tuning via structured policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07237 , 2025. Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2408.06292 .Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegr-effe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bod-hisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 36, 2023. David A. McAllester and Robert E. Schapire. On the convergence rate of Good–Turing esti-mators. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT) , pages 1–6, 2000. J. Mockus. On the Bayes Methods for Seeking the Extremal Point. IFAC Proceedings Volumes ,8(1):428–431, August 1975. ISSN 14746670. doi: 10.1016/S1474-6670(17)67769-3. Henry Moss, David Leslie, Daniel Beck, Javier Gonz´ alez, and Paul Rayson. BOSS: Bayesian Optimization over String Spaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pages 15476–15486. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. Alexander Novikov, Ngˆ an V˜ u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 , 2025. Changyong Oh, Jakub M. Tomczak, Efstratios Gavves, and Max Welling. Combinatorial Bayesian optimization using the graph cartesian product. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, pages 2910–2920, 2019. OpenAI. OpenAI o1 System Card, December 2024. 42 Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (NeurIPS 2022) , March 2022. Jan Peters, Katharina M¨ ulling, and Yasemin Altun. Relative entropy policy search. In Pro-ceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 1607–1612. AAAI Press, 2010. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v24i1.7727. Wolfgang Ponweiser, Tobias Wagner, Dirk Biermann, and Markus Vincze. Multiobjective Op-timization on a Limited Budget of Evaluations Using Model-Assisted $\mathcal {S}$-Metric Selection. In G¨ unter Rudolph, Thomas Jansen, Nicola Beume, Simon Lucas, and Carlo Poloni, editors, Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN X , pages 784–794, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-87700-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-87700-4 78. Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training, 2018. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741, 2023. Mayk Caldas Ramos, Shane S. Michtavy, Marc D. Porosoff, and Andrew D. White. Bayesian optimization of catalysts with in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05341 , 2023. Bojana Rankovic and Philippe Schwaller. BoChemian: Large Language Model Embeddings for Bayesian Optimization of Chemical Reactions. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Adaptive Experimental Design and Active Learning in the Real World , 2023. Bojana Rankovi´ c, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, and Philippe Schwaller. Large language models as uncertainty-calibrated optimizers for experimental discovery, 2025. Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . MIT Press, 2006. Lisa Schut, Nenad Tomaˇ sev, Thomas McGrath, Demis Hassabis, Ulrich Paquet, and Been Kim. Bridging the human–ai knowledge gap through concept discovery and transfer in alphazero. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(13):e2406675122, 2025. Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando de Freitas. Taking the human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104 (1):148–175, 2016. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models, April 2024. Benjamin J. Shields, Jason Stevens, Jun Li, Marvin Parasram, Farhan Damani, Jesus I. Mar-tinez Alvarado, Jacob M. Janey, Ryan P. Adams, and Abigail G. Doyle. Bayesian reaction optimization as a tool for chemical synthesis. Nature , 590(7844):89–96, February 2021. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03213-y. 43 Ahmed Shoyeb Raihan, Hamed Khosravi, Srinjoy Das, and Imtiaz Ahmed. Accelerating material discovery with a threshold-driven hybrid acquisition policy-based Bayesian opti-mization. Manufacturing Letters , 41:1300–1311, October 2024. ISSN 2213-8463. doi: 10.1016/j.mfglet.2024.09.157. Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ NLP researchers, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2409.04109 .Chenglei Si, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Diyi Yang. The ideation–execution gap: Execution outcomes of LLM-generated versus human research ideas, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2506.20803 .David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815 , 2017. Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally can be more effective than scaling model parameters. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03314 .Edward Snelson and Zoubin Ghahramani. Sparse Gaussian Processes using Pseudo-inputs. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 18. MIT Press, 2005. Yan Song, Xidong Feng, Bo Liu, Xinyu Cui, Haotian Fu, Zichen Liu, Mengyue Yang, Cheng Deng, Jian Zhao, and Jun Wang. Learning stateful predictive knowledge from experience. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.28638 , 2026. Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M. Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process optimization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 1015–1022, 2010. Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung, Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin, Rachel Dias, Evan Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thompson, Johannes Heidecke, Amelia Glaese, and Tejal Patwardhan. PaperBench: Evaluating AI’s ability to replicate AI research, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01848 .Richard Cornelius Suwandi, Feng Yin, Juntao Wang, Renjie Li, Tsung-Hui Chang, and Sergios Theodoridis. Adaptive Kernel Design for Bayesian Optimization Is a Piece of CAKE with LLMs, September 2025. Yixuan Tang and Yi Yang. AI research agents narrow scientific exploration, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2605.27905 .Michalis Titsias. Variational Learning of Inducing Variables in Sparse Gaussian Processes. In 

Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,pages 567–574. PMLR, April 2009. Oleg Trott and Arthur J. Olson. Autodock vina: Improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of Com-putational Chemistry , 31(2):455–461, 2010. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21334. URL 

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jcc.21334 .44 Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017. Jun Wang. A Tutorial on LLM Reasoning: Relevant Methods behind ChatGPT o1, February 2025. Jun Wang, Meng Fang, Ziyu Wan, Muning Wen, Jiachen Zhu, Anjie Liu, Ziqin Gong, Yan Song, Lei Chen, Lionel M Ni, et al. Openr: An open source framework for advanced reasoning with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09671 , 2024. Yizao Wang, Jean-Yves Audibert, and R´ emi Munos. Algorithms for infinitely many-armed bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 21 , pages 1729– 1736, 2008. Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models, October 2022. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models, January 2023. Yifan Wu, Aron Walsh, and Alex M. Ganose. Race to the bottom: Bayesian optimisation for chemical problems. Digital Discovery , 3(6):1086–1100, 2024. ISSN 2635-098X. doi: 10.1039/ D3DD00234A. Wanghan Xu, Shuo Li, Tianlin Ye, Qinglong Cao, Yixin Chen, Hengjian Gao, Yiheng Wang, Qi Li, Kun Li, Sheng Xu, Shengdu Chai, Fangchen Yu, Xiangyu Zhao, Zhangrui Zhao, Weijie Ma, Zijie Guo, Koutian Wu, Haoyu Zhou, Haoxiang Yin, Lixue Cheng, Chaofan Hu, Haoxuan Li, Lu Mi, Xuxuan Xie, Yifan Zhou, Ruizhe Chen, Zhiwang Zhou, Xingjian Guo, Yuhao Zhou, Xuming He, Shengyuan Xu, Xinyu Gu, Jiamin Wu, Mianxin Liu, Chunfeng Song, Fenghua Ling, Dongzhan Zhou, Shixiang Tang, Yuqiang Li, Mao Su, Peng Ye, Siqi Sun, Bin Wang, Xue Yang, Zhenfei Yin, Tianfan Fu, Guangtao Zhai, Wanli Ouyang, Bo Zhang, Lei Bai, and Wenlong Zhang. ResearchClawBench: A benchmark for end-to-end autonomous scientific research, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.07591 .Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large Language Models as Optimizers, April 2024. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 36, 2023a. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629 .Yuxuan Yin, Yu Wang, Boxun Xu, and Peng Li. ADO-LLM: Analog Design Bayesian Opti-mization with In-Context Learning of Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design , pages 1–9, Newark Liberty International Airport Marriott New York NY USA, October 2024. ACM. ISBN 979-8-4007-1077-3. doi: 10.1145/3676536.3676816. 45 Zhongwei Yu, Rasul Tutunov, Alexandre Max Maraval, Zikai Xie, Zhenzhi Tan, Jiankang Wang, Bin Cao, Zijing Li, Liangliang Xu, Qi Yang, Jun Jiang, Sanzhong Luo, Zhenxiao Guo, Tongyi Zhang, Haitham Bou-Ammar, and Jun Wang. Efficient and Principled Scientific Discovery through Bayesian Optimization: A Tutorial, April 2026. Ye Yuan, Can Chen, Zipeng Sun, Dinghuai Zhang, Christopher Pal, and Xue Liu. Diffusion large language models for black-box optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.14446 , 2026. 46 Appendix of Large Discovery Models 

Appendix Contents 

A Notation 47 B Detailed Proofs 48 

B.1 Proof of Proposition 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 B.2 Proof of Lemma 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 B.3 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 

C Technical Implementation Details 52 

C.1 Gaussian Process Surrogate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 C.2 Acquisition Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 C.3 Batch Acquisition Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 

D Ablation Studies 54 

D.1 Pure LLM-based research loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 D.2 Test-time Search for LDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 D.3 Hyperparameter ablations for LDM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 

E Additional Fine-Tuning Analyses 61 

E.1 Fine-Tuning as Value Distillation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61 E.2 Cross-Molecule Transfer without Reasoning Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 E.3 Supplementary Quantitative Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 E.4 In-Distribution Single-Task Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 E.5 Case-level Out-of-distribution Generalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 E.6 Task-level Out-of-distribution Generalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 E.7 Distilling Acquisition Value into the Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 

## A Notation 

Symbol Meaning 

X Design space. 

x Candidate design. 

x⋆ Global maximiser of the unknown objective. 

R(x) Unknown objective or reward evaluated at x.

Dt Empirical evaluation history available at round t.

Ct Broader search context used to condition candidate generation. 

ri Observed reward for evaluated design xi.

pθ Base generative-model distribution. 

Continued on the next page 

47 Symbol Meaning (continued) 

pθ,α Effective proposal induced by inference configuration α; in the controlled base-measure-exponent case, pθ,α ∝ pαθ .

θ Parameters of the generative model. 

α Inference configuration, including prompting, decoding, reasoning, refine-ment, and inference-time compute. 

At Active proposal support at round t.

μt(x) Surrogate posterior mean at x.

σt(x) Surrogate posterior standard deviation at x.

at(x) Acquisition value at x (also written at(x)). 

πt Acquisition-tilted search policy. 

η Acquisition-tilt strength. 

N Candidate-pool size. 

b Batch size for parallel evaluation. 

T Sequential evaluation budget. 

Bt Selected evaluation batch at round t.

k Number of candidates selected by Gumbel-top-k; k(·, ·) denotes the GP kernel when used with function arguments. 

m(·) GP prior mean function. 

k(·, ·) GP kernel function. 

ϕ(·) Representation map used by the kernel. 

ϵt Observation noise at round t.

λ Noise regulariser in the information-gain term. 

βt UCB confidence parameter. 

γT Maximum information gain over T evaluations. 

ζt Near-UCB acquisition tolerance. 

κt(ζt) Proposal mass assigned to the near-UCB set. 

ρt Per-round sampling-failure probability allocation. dX Distance on the design space. 

rcov  

> t

Reservoir coverage radius at round t.

L Local regularity constant. 

χ H¨ older exponent in the local regularity condition. 

TLLM LLM decoding temperature used in experiments; in the controlled expo-nent ablation, TLLM = 1 /α .

H Number of refinement branches. 

N good  

> t

Number of retained high-value candidates at round t.

rthresh Reward threshold used by task-specific filtering. 

## B Detailed Proofs 

We give the full proof of Proposition 1, Lemma 1 and Theorem 1. 

B.1 Proof of Proposition 1 

Proof. Write J(q) = Ex∼q[at] − 1 

> η

KL( q∥pθ,α ). For any q,

J(q) = X

> x

q(x)at(x) − 1

> η

X

> x

q(x) log q(x)

pθ,α (x) = − 1

> η

X

> x

q(x) log q(x)

pθ,α (x)eηa t(x) .

48 Define πt(x) ∝ pθ,α (x)eηa t(x) with normaliser Zt. Substituting, 

J(q) = − 1 

> η

KL( q∥πt) + 1 

> η

log Zt ≤ 1 

> η

log Zt,

with equality iff q = πt, since KL( q∥πt) ≥ 0 with equality iff q = πt. As pθ,α ∝ pαθ , the normalising constants combine into Zt, giving (3). 

B.2 Proof of Lemma 1 

Fix a round t and condition on the history Ct. Under this conditioning, the effective reservoir support At, the inference-configured proposal pθ,α (· | C t), and the acquisition function at(x) = 

μt(x) + √βtσt(x) are fixed. Let 

Zt = X

> u∈At

exp {η a t(u)} pθ,α (u | C t)be the normalising constant of (13). For a tolerance ζt ≥ 0, write 

U = Ut(ζt) = {x ∈ At : at(x) ≥ a⋆t,A − ζt}.

Every u ∈ U has acquisition at least a⋆t,A − ζt. Hence the contribution of U alone gives the lower bound 

Zt = X

> u∈At

exp {η a t(u)} pθ,α (u | C t)

≥ X

> u∈U

exp {η a t(u)} pθ,α (u | C t)

≥ exp {η(a⋆t,A − ζt)} pθ,α (U | C t)= κt(ζt) exp {η(a⋆t,A − ζt)}. (18) Now fix z ≥ 0 and define the bad event 

Bz = {x ∈ At : a⋆t,A − at(x) > ζ t + z}.

For every x ∈ Bz ,

at(x) < a ⋆t,A − ζt − z. 

Therefore, 

P(xt ∈ Bz | C t) = πt(Bz )=

P 

> x∈Bz

exp {η a t(x)} pθ,α (x | C t)

Zt

≤ exp {η(a⋆t,A − ζt − z)} pθ,α (Bz | C t)

κt(ζt) exp {η(a⋆t,A − ζt)}≤ exp {− ηz }

κt(ζt) , (19) where the first inequality uses (18), and the second uses pθ,α (Bz | C t) ≤ 1. This proves the tail form 

P  a⋆t,A − at(xt) > ζ t + z | C t

 ≤ e−ηz 

κt(ζt) .

To obtain the high-probability statement, take 

z = 1

η log 1

ρtκt(ζt) .

49 Since ρt ∈ (0 , 1) and κt(ζt) ≤ 1, this z is non-negative. Substitution into (19) gives an upper bound of ρt on the bad event, so with conditional probability at least 1 − ρt,

a⋆t,A − at(xt) ≤ ζt + 1

η log 1

ρtκt(ζt) .

This proves Lemma 1. 

B.3 Proof of Theorem 1 

The proof decomposes regret into a discovery term and an optimisation term, then controls the optimisation term using UCB calibration and Lemma 1. As stated earlier, we can control the simple regret by analysing the upper bound of the cu-mulative regret, which can be decomposed by the discovery gap and optimisation regret as below. Reg t = R(x⋆) − R⋆t,A 

| {z }

> Reg disc
> t

+ R⋆t,A − R(xt)

| {z }

> Reg opt
> t

. (20) We begin with bounding the discovery gap. By Assumption 2, for every x ∈ At,

R(x⋆) − R(x) ≤ L dX (x, x ⋆)χ.

Taking the infimum over x ∈ At gives Reg disc  

> t

= R(x⋆) − sup 

> x∈At

R(x)= inf 

> x∈At

{R(x⋆) − R(x)}≤ L inf 

> x∈At

dX (x, x ⋆)χ

= L



inf 

> x∈At

dX (x, x ⋆)

χ

= L(rcov  

> t

)χ. (21) Thus, the discovery price is exactly controlled by the current reservoir coverage radius. Next, we form the simultaneous sampling event. For each t, apply Lemma 1 with failure probability ρt. Define 

ξt = ζt + 1

η log 1

ρtκt(ζt) .

The lemma gives, conditionally on Ct,

P(a⋆t,A − at(xt) ≤ ξt | C t) ≥ 1 − ρt.

Equivalently, the conditional failure probability is at most ρt. Iterating this bound over t =1, . . . , T and applying a union bound yields an event Esamp such that 

P(Esamp ) ≥ 1 −

> T

X

> t=1

ρt ≥ 1 − δsamp ,

and on Esamp ,

a⋆t,A − at(xt) ≤ ξt for all t ≤ T. (22) As such, we can bound the optimisation term on the good event. Let Egp be the event in Assumption 1. On this event, for every x ∈ X and t ≤ T ,

R(x) ≤ at(x), R(x) ≥ μt(x) − pβtσt(x). (23) 50 On Egp ∩ E samp ,

R⋆t,A = sup 

> x∈At

R(x)

≤ sup 

> x∈At

at(x)= a⋆t,A 

≤ at(xt) + ξt, (24) where the first inequality uses UCB optimism and the last inequality uses (22). Therefore Reg opt  

> t

= R⋆t,A − R(xt) ≤ at(xt) − R(xt) + ξt.

Using the lower side of (23) at the sampled point xt,

at(xt) − R(xt) = μt(xt) + pβtσt(xt) − R(xt)

≤ 2pβtσt(xt). (25) Hence Reg opt  

> t

≤ 2pβtσt(xt) + ξt. (26) Combining (20), (21), and (26), on Egp ∩ E samp we have, for every t ≤ T ,Reg t ≤ L(rcov  

> t

)χ + 2 pβtσt(xt) + ξt.

Summing over t and using the monotonicity βt ≤ βT ,

> T

X

> t=1

Reg t ≤ L

> T

X

> t=1

(rcov  

> t

)χ + 2 pβTTX

> t=1

σt(xt) + 

> T

X

> t=1

ξt. (27) By the standard information-gain variance bound for GP-UCB, 

> T

X

> t=1

σ2 

> t

(xt) ≤ CλγT , Cλ = 2log(1 + λ−1) .

Therefore, by Cauchy–Schwarz, 

> T

X

> t=1

σt(xt) ≤

vuutT

> T

X

> t=1

σ2 

> t

(xt) ≤ pT C λγT . (28) Substituting (28) into (27) gives 

> T

X

> t=1

Reg t ≤ L

> T

X

> t=1

(rcov  

> t

)χ + 2 pT C λβT γT +

> T

X

> t=1

ξt.

Finally, substituting the definition of ξt,1

T

> T

X

> t=1

Reg t ≤ LT

> T

X

> t=1

(rcov  

> t

)χ + 2 

r CλβT γT

T + 1

T

> T

X

> t=1



ζt + 1

η log 1

ρtκt(ζt)



.

Assumption 1 gives P(Egp ) ≥ 1 − δgp , and the sampling argument gives P(Esamp ) ≥ 1 − δsamp . A final union bound gives 

P(Egp ∩ E samp ) ≥ 1 − δgp − δsamp .

This completes the proof of Theorem 1. 51 C Technical Implementation Details 

This appendix elaborates on the core algorithmic and implementation details of the LDM frame-work, covering Gaussian process surrogate modelling, acquisition function design and batch sampling schemes. All implementations strictly follow the acquisition-tilted search framework presented in the main text, and only expand on the specific execution logic for surrogate model training and sampling. 

C.1 Gaussian Process Surrogate 

LDM employs a Gaussian Process (GP) as the probabilistic surrogate model. It fits the posterior distribution of the black-box reward function from historical experimental observations, and outputs calibrated predictive means and epistemic uncertainty to provide quantitative inputs for acquisition function computation. 

C.1.1 Prior Specification 

Let X denote the design space, R(x) the true black-box reward function. Each experimental observation contains independent Gaussian noise: 

ri = R(xi) + ϵi, ϵi ∼ N (0 , σ 2

> n

)where σ2 

> n

is the observation noise variance. The GP prior is defined as: 

R(x) ∼ GP  m(x), k (x, x ′)

where: 

• The prior mean function m(x) adopts a constant prior, i.e. m(x) = m0, with m0 a scalar parameter that can be optimised from data; 

• k(x, x ′) is a positive-definite kernel function that characterises the correlation between samples in the design space. Its specific form is adapted to the design space, for example an RBF kernel for continuous parameter spaces or a string kernel for sequence spaces; 

• The kernel hyperparameters, observation noise variance σ2 

> n

and prior constant m0 together form the set of parameters to be estimated for the GP. 

C.1.2 Posterior Inference 

Let Dt = {(xi, r i)}ti=1 denote the cumulative historical observation dataset at iteration t. We define the t × t kernel matrix Kt and the t-dimensional cross-covariance vector kt(x): 

Kt =



k(x1, x 1) k(x1, x 2) . . . k(x1, x t)

k(x2, x 1) k(x2, x 2) . . . k(x2, x t)... ... . . . ...

k(xt, x 1) k(xt, x 2) . . . k(xt, x t)

 , kt(x) = 



k(x1, x )

k(x2, x )...

k(xt, x )

 ∈ Rt

By Bayesian conditioning, the posterior reward distribution for any candidate x ∈ X is Gaussian, with closed-form expressions for the posterior predictive mean and predictive variance: 

μt(x) = m0 + kt(x)⊤  Kt + σ2

> n

I−1 (rt − m0 · 1) (29) 

σ2 

> t

(x) = k(x, x ) − kt(x)⊤  Kt + σ2

> n

I−1 kt(x). (30) 52 where rt = ( r1, . . . , r t)⊤ is the vector of observed rewards, and 1 is an all-ones vector of length t.The posterior mean estimates the expected reward of a candidate, while the posterior variance quantifies the epistemic uncertainty of the prediction. 

C.1.3 Hyperparameter Estimation 

The GP hyperparameters are fitted via Type-II maximum likelihood estimation , whereby optimal hyperparameter values are determined by maximising the marginal log-likelihood of the observed data. The marginal log-likelihood of the observed data Dt is given by: log p(rt | D t) = − 12 (rt − m0 · 1)⊤  Kt + σ2

> n

I−1 (rt − m0 · 1) − 12 log Kt + σ2

> n

I − t

2 log 2 π

Optimisation is performed using gradient-based algorithms such as L-BFGS. The parameters to be optimised include kernel hyperparameters such as lengthscales and output variance, obser-vation noise variance σ2

> n

, and the prior constant m0. This method automatically adapts to the smoothness and noise level of the design space, improving the fitting accuracy and uncertainty calibration of the surrogate model. Hyperparameter optimisation is re-run after each iteration with new observations to update the surrogate model. 

C.2 Acquisition Functions 

Acquisition functions quantify the experimental value of each candidate based on the GP pos-terior mean and uncertainty, and act as the core value signal guiding search direction and balancing exploitation and exploration. LDM supports three acquisition functions for single-and multi-objective settings, all of which can be directly embedded into the acquisition-tilted search framework. 

C.2.1 Expected Improvement 

Expected Improvement (EI) (Jones et al., 1998) measures the expected gain of a candidate relative to the current best observed value. It is one of the most widely used acquisition functions in single-objective optimisation, and takes the form: 

aEI (x) = ( μt(x) − r∗ 

> t

− ξ) Φ( z) + σt(x)φ(z), z = μt(x) − r∗ 

> t

− ξσt(x) (31) where r∗ 

> t

= max i≤t ri is the best reward observed so far, ξ ≥ 0 is an exploration-adjustment hyperparameter, and Φ( ·) and φ(·) denote the cumulative distribution function and probabil-ity density function of the standard normal distribution, respectively. EI naturally balances exploitation and exploration, prioritising candidates with higher expected returns. 

C.2.2 Upper Confidence Bound 

The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) (Srinivas et al., 2010) computes a weighted sum of the predictive mean and uncertainty. It has a concise form and enjoys rigorous theoretical guarantees on cumulative regret, and takes the form: 

aUCB (x) = μt(x) + pβt σt(x) (32) where βt > 0 is the exploration weight coefficient, which may be set via theoretical formulae or tuned as a hyperparameter to control the exploration intensity of the algorithm. By adjusting βt,UCB can flexibly switch between exploitation-biased and exploration-biased search strategies. 53 C.2.3 Expected Hypervolume Improvement 

For multi-objective optimisation tasks, Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI) is described alongside model-assisted S-metric selection (Ponweiser et al., 2008) and the EHVI formulation and computation of Emmerich et al. (Emmerich et al., 2011). Ponweiser et al. introduce model-assisted S-metric selection based on hypervolume contribution; Emmerich et al. formulate and compute hypervolume-based expected improvement (EHVI). EHVI computes the expected hypervolume gain of the current empirical Pareto front after adding a candidate, and automatically balances exploitation of favourable objective trade-offs and exploration of under-sampled design regions, without requiring pre-specified objective weights. In the multi-objective setting, the core acquisition-tilted search framework remains unchanged; only the scalar acquisition value at(x) is replaced with the EHVI value, enabling seamless extension of LDM to multi-objective discovery. 

C.3 Batch Acquisition Sampling 

In parallel experimental settings, multiple candidates must be selected for simultaneous eval-uation at each iteration. LDM applies Gumbel-top-k to the finite candidate pool, producing a weighted sample without replacement (the Plackett–Luce batch distribution) (Kool et al., 2019). This realises finite-pool acquisition-tilted selection while avoiding duplicate selections in the evaluation batch. The implementation procedure is as follows: 1. For each candidate xi in the pool generated by the LLM, compute its unnormalised tilted weight: 

wi = pθ,α (xi | C t) · exp {η · at(xi)}

where pθ,α (xi | C t) is the conditional generation probability of the LLM, at(xi) is the acquisition function value, and η is the acquisition tilt strength coefficient. 2. Sample independent Gumbel noise gi ∼ Gumbel(0 , 1) for each weight, rank candidates by log wi + gi in descending order, and select the top k candidates to form the evaluation batch. Each selected candidate is removed from the pool after selection. Conditional on the generated pool, the ordered batch follows the corresponding weighted without-replacement distribution, retaining the acquisition weighting and avoiding duplicate selections in parallel evaluation pipelines. 

## D Ablation Studies 

These regimes stress different parts of the framework. autoresearch is a multi-turn code-editing 

task: the agent maintains a research state, repeatedly edits a persistent artifact train.py , and can change the representation of the search space as new mechanisms are discovered. Small-molecule and CDRH3 design are closer to single-step proposal tasks: at each BO round, the LLM proposes or parameterises a candidate pool, the surrogate acquisition selects from that pool, and the expensive oracle evaluates the selected designs. The ablations therefore have two complementary purposes. First, in §D.1, we push the boundary of a pure current-agent research loop on nanoGPT by removing the calibrated BO value entirely. This tests how far an LLM agent can go when it can read its own logs and reflect, but cannot search against a surrogate posterior. Second, in §D.2, we keep the value model and study LDM test-time search itself. On nanoGPT this means varying the internal LDM-TTS settings, such 54 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 

Experiment # 

0.96 0.98 1.00 1.02 1.04 1.06 

> Validation BPB (lower is better)

1st Dense Scale 2nd Try Sparse Memory 3rd Rebalancing Dense Compute Around Sparse Memory 4th Confirming the 512 Sparse Frontier with Ablation 5th Grid Search: Optimizing the 512 Sparse Frontier With VRAM-Aware Batch Scaling 

> baseline current train.py shorten warmdown ratio to 0.4 increase depth to 12 widen depth 12 model to 1024 embedding lower matrix learning rate to 0.040 raise weight decay to 0.20 lower Adam beta1 to 0.65 increase value gate channels to 64 probe trainable value embedding scales probe lower value scale initialization probe slower value scale drift probe tiny shorter warmdown probe value scale beta damping probe sparse bigram value memory probe larger sparse bigram hash probe larger sparse hash capacity probe very large sparse hash cliff probe decorrelated trigram sparse value probe larger trigram sparse table probe stronger early bigram sparse scale probe late Demon Adam beta1 schedule probe higher final bigram sparse scale probe base value table beta1 probe very high base value table beta1 probe base value table beta2 probe lower base value table beta1 with beta2 probe lower final lr floor after long warm... round3 freeze base value scales round3 repeat freeze base value scales round3 longer warmdown after frozen base s... round3 repeat longer warmdown after frozen... round3 add layer3 bigram value memory round3 repeat add layer3 bigram value memory round3 raise early bigram init after layer3 round3 repeat raise early bigram init afte... round3 add layer1 bigram value memory round3 repeat add layer1 bigram value memory round3 shrink dense width with sparse memory round3 probe 512 width sparse memory round3 lower matrix lr to 0.015 at 512 width round3 raise sparse scale lr further round4 probe 11 layer fixed 512 width round4 raise matrix lr 0.01625 for 11 laye... round4 repeat matrix lr 0.01625 for 11 lay... round4 lower x0 scalar lr 0.95x round4 raise x0 beta1 0.965 at 0.95x lr round4 x0 lr 0.94375 beta2 0.95125 round4 repeat resid lr 0.0125 with x0 lr 0... Searched: batch100 warmdown 0.45625 adam 0.625

CodeX under ZERO Prior: Autoresearch with 875 Experiments, 299 Kept Improvements 

> Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Round 4 Round 5 Best so far Self-Reflection happens here

Figure 20: Pure LLM research loop on autoresearch . Validation val bpb (lower is bet-ter) across 875 no-BO, no-acquisition experiments. Grey points are individual trials and the green step curve is the best value found so far; yellow stars mark self-reflection checkpoints where the agent summarises the ledger and enters a new research regime. The coloured bands show the loop’s staged progress: dense scaling, sparse-memory invention, dense-compute re-balancing around sparse memory, ablation-based confirmation of the 512-sparse frontier, and final VRAM-aware batch/schedule search. The curve demonstrates that a pure LLM loop can do real sequential research, but also its ceiling: after the large regime shifts it plateaus near 

val bpb ≈ 0.956, above the LDM result of 0 .93421 in Figure 7. as inner search budget, the discovery mechanism, and acquisition choice. On molecules and CDRH3, it means asking whether open-source LLM proposers benefit from larger proposal and acquisition-selection budgets in single-step design rounds. 

D.1 Pure LLM-based research loop 

This ablation asks whether the LLM research loop alone is sufficient. Operationally, it is the 

η = 0 limit of Eq. (3): the agent still reads the history, edits train.py , launches experiments, and keeps improvements, but it does not receive a BO posterior, an acquisition score, or an uncertainty-directed suggestion for what to try next. We deliberately make this a strong LLM-only baseline rather than a straw man: it is meant to push the boundary of what a current advanced agent system can do on this task. The only extra scaffolding is a short reflection instruction that asks the Codex agent to monitor the result log as a whole, ask whether the current iteration verifies the previous hypothesis, extract any new mechanistic insight, and plan the next iteration. This is not human-in-the-loop steering of the scientific direction; it is an end-to-end LLM workflow whose context explicitly asks the agent to behave like a careful experimentalist. Thus the ablation tests the best version of the claim that an LLM, supplied with its own experimental transcript and enough task knowledge to edit the architecture and optimiser, can bootstrap an autonomous research process without an explicit value model. Figure 20 shows that the pure LLM loop is not inert. It discovers several coherent research phases: first dense scaling, then sparse memory, then a rebalance of dense compute around the sparse memory idea, followed by confirmation and grid search around the 512-sparse frontier. The best-so-far curve falls from the initial val bpb ≈ 1.069 to ≈ 1.01 after the first phase, to 55 Phase Working hypothesis Evidence generated by the loop Best val bpb                                                                   

> Dense scal-ing Capacity is the early bottleneck, but only while the model can still be trained inside the fixed budget. Depth 10 and 12 give large drops; widen-ing the depth-12 model helps; depth 14 worsens near the memory ceiling. The re-flection turns this into the rule: dense ca-pacity helps until the update budget be-comes the bottleneck. 1.010136 Sparse value memory Dense capacity is sat-urated, but cheap as-sociative capacity may still help if routed through abounded value path. Trainable value scales, sparse hashed bi-gram memory, larger hash tables, decorre-lated trigram memory, and phase-specific damping improve the frontier; broader routing and optimiser rewires are recorded as negative memories. 0.990738 Dense-compute rebalance Sparse memory works best when the dense core is smaller and no longer steals the fixed training budget. Causal ablations show trigram mem-ory, early bigram memory, and trainable sparse scales matter. Shrinking dense width to 640 and then 512 creates the large breakthrough, after which matrix LR, final LR floor, and sparse-scale LR are retuned. 0.958666 Frontier con-firmation The 512 sparse-memory regime is anarrow compute/update-budget island, and remaining gains re-quire repeats. Widths below and above 512 lose; re-moving early ngram memory increases throughput but hurts validation, showing the memory path is causal. Restored-anchor repeats estimate a noise floor of roughly 3–5 ×10 −4BPB. 0.957766 VRAM-aware batch tuning Spare VRAM should buy batch/throughput and coupled schedule tuning, not a return to dense scaling. The context retrieves the dense-shrink successes and negative memories against larger dense models, then grid-searches batch size, warmdown, final LR, Adam damping, and weight decay while logging steps, tokens, MFU, and loss slopes. 0.955923

Table 4: Mechanistic trace of the pure LLM research loop. Each row is a phase extracted from the loop logs. The LLM acts like a lightweight experimental scientist: it writes a hypothesis, tests code-level interventions, records both successes and failures, updates a regime label, and carries those memories into the next phase. 

≈ 0.991 after the second reflection, and to ≈ 0.959 after the sparse-frontier breakthrough. In other words, a modern code agent with a task-specific prompt and access to its own run log can already produce human-readable, scientifically reasonable progress: it can form hypotheses, translate them into code edits, test them, preserve improvements, and revise its research state. The archived loop logs show what this “research work” consisted of. The agent did not merely enumerate nearby hyperparameters. After each phase it wrote a reflection report: it compressed the ledger into mechanistic claims, labelled memories by regime and mechanism, retrieved pos-itive and negative examples, and used the labelled memories to choose the next experiment family. Table 4 summarises the resulting trajectory. The important point is the statefulness :the loop changes what it believes the problem is. It begins with ordinary dense scaling, de-cides that dense capacity has saturated under the five-minute budget, invents sparse associative value memory as a cheaper capacity axis, then shrinks the dense core so that the sparse-memory model can train in time, and finally switches to repeat-first, VRAM-aware frontier tuning once improvements fall into the noise band. This trace is the strongest evidence that the baseline is a genuine research loop. It performs causal ablations (for example, removing trigram memory, early bigram memory, or sparse scales), estimates the noise floor by repeating restored anchors, and eventually augments the ledger 56 with trajectory diagnostics such as steps, tokens, MFU, train/eval gap, and loss slopes. It also learns what not to do: the contexts explicitly retrieve failed routing rewires, failed dense-width probes, crashes, and repeated optimiser mismatches as negative memories. In short, the loop accumulates procedural knowledge, not just a list of winning commits. The limitation is equally visible. After the third breakthrough, the remaining ≈ 500 experiments are mostly local confirmation and grid search around the same frontier. The loop continues to keep small improvements, but the envelope is nearly flat, ending around val bpb ≈ 0.956. This is better than the no-discover Karpathy baseline in Figure 7, which stalls at 0 .9767, but it is still far from the LDM curve, which reaches 0 .93421 under the same H100 five-minute-run setting. The pure LLM loop can reason about its own transcript and name plausible new regimes, but between those reflections it has no calibrated estimate of where improvement is likely, where uncertainty remains high, or when a plateau is evidence that the current boundary is exhausted. This is the ablation’s main conclusion. The bottleneck is not proposal expressivity: the LLM can write useful training code, exploit prior knowledge about how the architecture can be modified, and remember enough of the transcript to pursue multi-stage ideas. The bottleneck is value. Without μt, σt, and the acquisition at, the run log remains a narrative memory rather than a searchable value landscape . LDM supplies exactly that missing object: the surrogate turns the same history into a posterior over the program space, and the acquisition turns that posterior into a decision value for both local refinement and boundary-moving discover steps. The pure LLM loop therefore validates the reservoir side of the framework and shows how far current agent systems can already go, while also showing why the BO-value side is necessary for the performance gains in the main experiment. 

D.2 Test-time Search for LDM 

This ablation asks whether LDM exhibits the same test-time scaling behaviour that motivates inference-time search in language-model reasoning (Snell et al., 2025), but in the harder setting where the value is an expensive scientific objective approximated by a surrogate. We keep the outer evaluation budget fixed and vary only the cheap inner-loop budget of LDM-TTS. Concretely, the inner budget has four knobs: (i) how many candidate programs the LLM proposes at each outer iteration, (ii) how many hypothesis or refinement branches the BO inner loop expands for each candidate before scoring, (iii) how many of those scored candidates the acquisition retains for the next round, and (iv) which acquisition function scores them. The detailed autoresearch test-time-search sweep, with its N4H4/N8H8 budgets and EI vs. posterior-mean comparison, already appears in Section 6.2; here we keep only the molecule and CDRH3 single-step budget sweeps. The theory in §5 predicts exactly this dependence: increasing the near-acquisition mass available to the tilted sampler reduces the LDM sampling shortfall term, but only if the added candidates are also evaluated by a calibrated value model rather than by language plausibility alone. 

D.2.1 Small-molecule drug discovery 

The molecular ablation repeats the same question in a chemically open-ended space. Here the expensive evaluation is a two-objective KRAS G12D score, and performance is the dom-inated Pareto hypervolume under the Vina/activity objectives of §6.1.3. We use the Direct-Softmax LDM pipeline with a Qwen3.5-9B proposer and vary two inner-loop budgets. A label 

proposer {K} bo {M} means that the LLM proposes a pool of K candidate SMILES strings and the BO/EHVI inner loop is allowed to score up to M candidates and retain the best-scoring ones before the next expensive molecular evaluation is chosen. Thus K controls the breadth of the LLM reservoir draw, while M controls how much of that breadth is exposed to the calibrated 57 multi-objective value. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Expensive evaluations 0510 15 20 25 30 Pareto hypervolume 

> LDM-TTS (Qwen3.5-9B) for Molecular Design: Pareto Hypervolume Mean +/- Std
> proposer16_bo16 proposer32_bo16 proposer32_bo32 proposer64_bo32 proposer64_bo64

Figure 21: Test-time search scaling for molecular design. Pareto hypervolume (higher is better) over expensive molecular evaluations for Qwen3.5-9B Direct-Softmax LDM-TTS. Curves show the mean over independent runs, with shaded bands denoting one standard devia-tion; legend entries report the LLM proposal budget and BO/EHVI acquisition-scoring budget. Balanced scaling of both budgets improves hypervolume most: proposer64 bo64 reaches the strongest final Pareto front, while increasing proposals without matching acquisition bandwidth gives smaller or unstable gains. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 

> Expensive evaluations
> 0510 15 20 25 30
> Pareto hypervolume

proposer16 / BoN16         

> EHVI mean
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
> Expensive evaluations

proposer32 / BoN32         

> EHVI mean
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
> Expensive evaluations

proposer64 / BoN64 

> EHVI mean

Qwen3.5-9B acquisition-function ablation 

Figure 22: Abaltion on acquisition function over different search budgets for molecular design. Figure 21 shows that test-time compute also scales in the molecular setting, but only when both inner budgets grow together. Increasing the LLM proposal budget from 16 to 32 im-proves the curve, and increasing the BO/EHVI scoring budget from 16 to 32 improves it further: proposer32 bo32 dominates the smaller-budget settings through most of the run. 

proposer64 bo64 makes the largest early jump and keeps the highest final hypervolume; the asymmetric proposer64 bo32 does worse, which shows that broad SMILES generation is useful only when the EHVI side has enough bandwidth to filter the resulting candidates. Figure 22 adds the acquisition-function dimension. At small budgets, mean- or UCB-style ac-quisitions (a 0 .5/0.5 weighted scalarisation of the Vina and activity objectives) outperform the strict EHVI; as n grows, EHVI overtakes them and continues to improve, while mean-style ac-58 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 110                                                                                

> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  EI: -107.66 +/-4.92 Mean: -105.82 +/-2.41 UCB: -109.48 +/-1.75
> 1ADQ_A
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  EI: -107.51 +/-1.37 Mean: -106.69 +/-2.32 UCB: -109.57 +/-0.61
> 1FBI_X
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  EI: -91.22 +/-5.13 Mean: -88.06 +/-4.64 UCB: -88.31 +/-1.61
> 1H0D_C
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 Evaluation index 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  EI: -102.99 +/-1.61 Mean: -99.36 +/-0.87 UCB: -102.33 +/-0.61
> 1NSN_S
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 Evaluation index 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  EI: -107.91 +/-1.30 Mean: -108.12 +/-1.56 UCB: -105.31 +/-0.91
> 1OB1_C
> LDM-TTS (Qwen3.5-9B, Budget 300) across acquisition functions
> EI Mean UCB

Figure 23: Comparison of different acquisition functions for LDM-TTS with a fixed proposer budget of 300 on Antibody CDRH3 design. quisitions degrade or stagnate. The mechanism is bandwidth: EHVI is built on the strict Pareto frontier and therefore needs a large screening budget to be effective, because multi-objective improvements correspond to sparse non-dominated points. Mean-style acquisitions collapse the two objectives into one scalar, so at small budgets the per-step randomness from a thin screening budget partially substitutes for the missing Pareto signal, smoothing out the optimisation and keeping the curve flat; once the budget grows, EHVI’s strict-screening advantage takes over. 

D.2.2 Antibody CDRH3 design 

Figure 23 compares different acquisition functions on the five antigens at a fixed proposer budget of 300. LDM’s calibrated acquisitions (EI, UCB and variants) are broadly better than mean-style and random baselines, mirroring the molecular trend above. The result shows that a calibrated acquisition still extracts value from a broader candidate pool even when the open-source LLM has only weak biological priors, and qualifies the §6.5.2 antibody observation: hyperparameter sweeps have only weak sensitivity in this regime, but the choice of acquisition function still matters once the BO side has enough candidates to screen. The CDRH3 ablation is the sequence-design counterpart of the molecular budget-scaling exper-iment. The outer oracle budget is again fixed, but here the design space is a known, sparse, discrete sequence space rather than an open-ended SMILES space. We therefore ask a narrower question: does the LDM-TTS proposer budget on its own improve the best sequence found? A label Budget N denotes an inner proposer budget of N candidate CDRH3 sequences or neigh-bourhood samples generated before the next expensive oracle query. The CDRH3 ablation fixes the BO inner-loop side at its maximum feasible setting: after validity checks, deduplication, and history filtering, the acquisition is allowed to score all remaining candidates. So the experiment changes only the cheap LLM-side proposal breadth, not the number of oracle evaluations. Figure 24 shows the budget effect across antigen landscapes, which is weaker than that observed in molecular design. The smallest budget, Budget 36, improves quickly at the beginning but usually reaches a higher plateau. Increasing the proposer budget to 75 already improves the final binding energy on most targets, and the larger 150 and 300 budgets give the best final result on all five antigens. The strongest setting is target-dependent: budget 150 is best on 59 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 110                                                                                                                 

> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  Budget 36: -104.53 +/-1.16 Budget 75: -104.92 +/-1.23 Budget 150: -108.85 +/-2.21 Budget 300: -107.66 +/-4.92
> 1ADQ_A
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  Budget 36: -102.79 +/-4.02 Budget 75: -105.83 +/-0.52 Budget 150: -106.81 +/-2.01 Budget 300: -107.51 +/-1.37
> 1FBI_X
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  Budget 36: -85.91 +/-2.57 Budget 75: -88.39 +/-2.93 Budget 150: -88.98 +/-2.02 Budget 300: -91.22 +/-5.13
> 1H0D_C
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 Evaluation index 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> 60
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  Budget 36: -101.65 +/-2.98 Budget 75: -101.22 +/-1.34 Budget 150: -103.27 +/-0.46 Budget 300: -102.99 +/-1.61
> 1NSN_S
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 Evaluation index 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best-so-far  G (lower = better)  Budget 36: -103.80 +/-2.21 Budget 75: -104.97 +/-1.43 Budget 150: -108.80 +/-1.07 Budget 300: -107.91 +/-1.30
> 1OB1_C

LDM-TTS (Qwen3.5-9B, EI) across budgets for Antibody CDRH3 design    

> Budget 36 Budget 75 Budget 150 Budget 300

Figure 24: Effect of LDM-TTS proposer budget scaling on Antibody CDRH3 design. Each budget denotes the number of candidate sequences or sequence-neighbourhood samples gener-ated before an expensive oracle evaluation. Larger inference-time proposal budgets improve the attainable binding-energy plateau across antigen targets. 1ADQ A, 1NSN S, and 1OB1 C, while budget 300 is best on 1FBI X and 1H0D C. This non-monotonicity is expected in a rugged sequence landscape with finite seeds and a noisy surrogate: after the acquisition has enough candidates to cover the useful local neighbourhoods, further expansion can add redundant or lower-quality regions as well as genuinely novel ones. The main conclusion is therefore not that the largest budget always wins, but that the low-budget regime is systematically acquisition-starved and that moderate-to-large test-time pools substantially lower the attainable binding-energy plateau. This result complements the main CDRH3 comparison in Figure 13. There, policy-mode LDM outperforms direct token-level generation because the open-source LLM has a weaker biological sequence prior than it has for code or SMILES; emitting a few complete CDRH3 loops does not expose enough useful reservoir mass for BO to exploit. The ablation here isolates what happens once the LDM pipeline can expand the candidate pool: additional inference-time candidates become useful precisely because they are not selected by language plausibility alone. They are filtered by the surrogate acquisition, which converts a larger discrete reservoir into stronger best-so-far binding energy without spending extra oracle calls. Together, the molecule and CDRH3 ablations show that test-time scaling for single-step design is useful only when the added samples are exposed to a calibrated value model. Richly pre-trained SMILES models can absorb large direct proposal batches; sparse biological sequence spaces need enough sequence or neighbourhood coverage before acquisition filtering becomes effective. This complements the nanoGPT ablation: in multi-turn code search, LDM-TTS im-proves by searching a changing program landscape; in single-step design, it improves by scaling the candidate pool a calibrated acquisition can choose from. 

D.3 Hyperparameter ablations for LDM. 

We here supplement the sensitivity analysis of the two LDM variants on antigen 1NSN S us-ing five random seeds. For LDM DirectSoftmax , we vary the LLM sampling temperature TLLM ∈{0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1, 1.25 }, with TLLM = 1 /α for this controlled base-measure-exponent ablation, 60 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> Evaluation index
> 95
> 90
> 85
> 80
> 75
> 70
> 65
> 60
> Best-so-far Absolut energy (lower is better)
> LDM_Direct_Softmax temperature ablation on 1NSN_S
> alpha=0.25 (5 seeds) alpha=0.5 (5 seeds) alpha=0.75 (5 seeds) alpha=1.0 (5 seeds) alpha=1.25 (5 seeds)

(a) Effect of the LLM sampling temperature 

TLLM in LDM DirectSoftmax ; for this controlled base-measure-exponent ablation, TLLM = 1 /α . The ac-quisition temperature is fixed to η = 1. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> Evaluation index
> 110
> 100
> 90
> 80
> 70
> Best-so-far Absolut energy (lower is better)
> LDM_Policy_Softmax eta ablation on 1NSN_S
> eta=0 (5 seeds) eta=0.5 (5 seeds) eta=1 (5 seeds) eta=2 (5 seeds) eta=4 (5 seeds) eta=inf (argmax) (5 seeds)

(b) Effect of the acquisition temperature η in LDM PolicySoftmax . The LLM sampling tempera-ture is fixed to TLLM = 1 (and hence α = 1 in the controlled exponent setting). 

Figure 25: Hyperparameter ablations on the antibody-design task 1NSN S. Each curve reports the mean best-so-far Absolut energy over five random seeds, with the shaded region showing one standard deviation. Lower values are better. while fixing the acquisition temperature to η = 1. For LDM PolicySoftmax , we fix TLLM = 1 and vary the acquisition temperature η ∈ { 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, ∞} . Here, η = 0 corresponds to uniform selection among the policy representatives, while η = ∞ is equivalent to acquisition-function argmax. The per-temperature curves are plotted in Figure 25; we discuss their interpretation below. This overall behaviour is consistent with the discussion in Section 6.2. Figure 25 shows the per-temperature curves. The open-source LLM lacks biological sequence domain priors, so its autoregressive proposals over the 20 11 CDRH3 space are effectively near-random; in the policy variants the LLM already implements an implicit form of acquisition-aware importance sampling by expanding the candidate neighbourhood around promising incumbents rather than commit-ting to a single sequence, which dampens the marginal effect of further reweighting at test time. Consequently, global sweeps over the sampling temperature TLLM and the acquisition temper-ature η on antigen 1NSN S produce only weak sensitivity: Direct-Softmax slightly favours low 

TLLM and Policy-Softmax shows a marginal edge near η = 4, but all error bars overlap. Adjust-ing the two temperature knobs does not significantly change the final binding energy, which is consistent with the observation in §6.1.2 that the policy-mode LDM gain over direct generation comes from the LLM’s structural priors rather than from acquisition reweighting alone. 

## E Additional Fine-Tuning Analyses 

Section 4.4 describes how high-budget LDM test-time search is distilled into a student proposer, and Section 6.4 reports the main fine-tuning results on AutoResearch, antibody design, and small-molecule discovery. This appendix provides complementary evidence that is not repeated in the main text. 

E.1 Fine-Tuning as Value Distillation 

Modern LLM fine-tuning paradigms can be distinguished by the decision-theoretic value they distill into the model weights. Chat LLMs distill human preference value, reasoning LLMs distill verification value, and Discovery LLMs distill epistemic acquisition value. The object distilled 61 Figure 26: Overview of the LDM training pipeline workflow. Stage 1: High-budget test-time search generates candidate pools scored by surrogate acquisition values ( αt). Stage 2: 

High-value candidates are filtered via an empirical policy tilt bπ(N ) 

> t

, and numerical BO statistics are translated into semantic reasoning rationales ( zt,i ) via reasoning augmentation. Stage 3: 

The base model is fine-tuned on the CoT target ( zt,i , ˆxt,i ) using standard next-token prediction, compiling the high-budget search policy into an amortised student model ( pSFT ) capable of fast, low-budget inference. by LDM is therefore not the measured reward R(x) alone, nor the static memorisation of a high-reward molecule, protein, or program. Instead, the goal is to distill the acquisition strategy that decides which scarce experiment is worth running under uncertainty. Figure 26 summarises this three-stage training pipeline: high-budget test-time search, reasoning-augmented dataset construction, and supervised distillation into the student proposer. Table 5 illustrates how numerical acquisition evidence is translated into semantic supervision across the three discovery domains. 62 Domain Acquisition evidence (Numeri-cal) Example augmented rationale (Se-mantic) 

autoresearch 

code search Best run state 0019 reaches val bpb 

0.9811 by lowering TOTAL BATCH SIZE 

and tuning ASPECT RATIO ; several near-best runs also lower the batch size. The current parent already sits at the minimum batch size with only 5 active parameters and no improve-ment over the last 4 rounds. Lowering the total batch size has been a robust positive move—more steps fit in-side the fixed 30 s budget—but that lever is now exhausted and the active parame-ters have plateaued over the last four rounds , so the set is near its ceiling. Rather than re-tuning saturated knobs, I should activate a currently-inactive parameter (e.g. MATRIX LR ) to open a new optimisation dimension. Antibody CDRH3 design Best sequence ADGHTKQNPRW at 

−64 .28; the last four candidates share the fixed prefix ADGHTKQNPR 

and scan only the final position (W 

−64 .28, Y −62 .69, A −59 .38, S

−57 .96). The history is a single-point scan of the last residue on an already-refined scaffold, with the bulky aromatic W best so far. The informative move is to keep the re-fined prefix and test an untested residue of similar hydrophobic character —leucine (L)—which may reproduce W’s favourable hydrophobic contact; propose 

ADGHTKQNPRL .Small-molecule discovery 29 molecules evaluated and the loop is flagged stalled ; the top actives ( ∼

8.1) share one isoxazolone/thiazolone fused core with isopropoxy and cyano groups, docking ∼ − 8. Because the loop is stalled and near-duplicates are disallowed, adding a methyl to a known winner carries no information. The higher-value move is a recombina-tion or scaffold hop —e.g. combining the pyridine-ring variant with the mor-pholine side chain into a molecule not yet seen—so the candidate probes a genuinely new region of the Pareto frontier rather than exploiting a saturated one. 

Table 5: Reasoning augmentation turns numerical acquisition labels into semantic training signals. The rationales are faithful (translated and condensed) excerpts of reasoning traces generated by the self-hosted DeepSeek V4 Flash teacher inside the high-budget LDM-TTS loop, one per domain. They describe the epistemic value of managing research progress by reading the evaluated history, diagnosing stagnation, and choosing an information-adding move, rather than focusing only on the domain-specific final solution. Beyond the aggregate translation above, a single deployment-time trace shows the student 

reading the surrogate signal directly. On the stalled KRAS G12D loop, it inspects the per-candidate posterior before acting: 

Small-molecule discovery: “the strong scaffolds share a cyclopropyl–benzene core with trifluo-romethoxy and nitrile (Vina ≈ − 8.1, activity ≈ 7.0), so I keep that backbone; but the surro-gate’s activity uncertainty is still high ( ≈ 0.3–0.5), so there is room to explore , so I vary the polar group (N, N-dimethylamide, sulfonamide) and swap the ring (thiophene, furan, thi-azole, pyridine). . . ”, then proposing candidates that keep the proven scaffold while probing the high-uncertainty regions. 

The student thus grounds its explore/exploit decision on the surrogate’s predicted mean and uncertainty: it exploits the proven scaffold while steering exploration toward the coordinates the surrogate is least certain about, exactly the acquisition behaviour the fine-tuning is meant to distil. 63 E.2 Cross-Molecule Transfer without Reasoning Augmentation 

We test the minimal form of discovery fine-tuning without an explicit reasoning target. Training data are collected from high-budget LDM-TTS traces on a source molecular optimisation task. The Qwen3.5-9B proposer is fine-tuned on acquisition-weighted examples and then evaluated on a different molecular optimisation task within the same acquisition-guided LDM loop. This ablation retains the same LDM state and action schema as the reasoning-augmented setting, but omits the explicit research-progress rationale zt,i .This setting shows positive transfer across molecular tasks. The base Qwen3.5-9B LDM reaches a final hypervolume of 16 .489 ±5.867, whereas the fine-tuned model reaches 22 .279 ±3.828 under the same evaluation protocol. Because the discovery data are collected from one molecule and evaluated on another, the improvement cannot be explained by memorising the final molecules from the source task. It instead shows that acquisition-weighted fine-tuning can transfer part of the research-management policy even without an explicit reasoning channel. 

E.3 Supplementary Quantitative Tables 

Table 6 retains the G12C results not shown in the main-text KRAS G12D learning curve. Table 7 collects the numerical cross-domain comparison underlying the three main-text figures. 

Inference policy KRAS G12C KRAS G12D 

HV ↑ HV ↑

Qwen3.5-9B base (without cot) 11 .64 ± 2.63 16 .49 ± 5.87 Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (without cot) 14 .73 ± 3.09 22 .28 ± 3.83 DeepSeek V4 Flash (without cot) 18 .97 ± 1.76 24 .55 ± 3.59 DeepSeek V4 Flash (with cot) 19 .98 ± 2.00 24 .07 ± 3.12 

Fine-tuned Qwen3.5-9B (with cot) 20 .98 ± 2.92 26 .66 ± 2.61 

Table 6: Reasoning-augmentation ablation on small-molecule discovery. Final Pareto-front hypervolume at an evaluation budget of 80, averaged over five seeds.                             

> Model CoT AutoResearch Antibody SmallMol
> val bpb ↓−Ebind ↑HV ↑
> Base Qwen3.5-9B off 0.9965 102 .616 .49 Base Qwen3.5-9B on 0.9825 104 .4—LDM-SFT off 0.9829 105 .122 .28
> LDM-SFT on 0.9788 105 .526 .66
> Qwen3-Coder-30B ref. 0.9801 ——

Table 7: Cross-domain reasoning-augmentation ablation. Terminal metrics for the three fine-tuning studies. 

E.4 In-Distribution Single-Task Fit 

Before evaluating the distilled policies in the acquisition loop, we verify that each single-task model fits its reasoning-augmented training data. We track training and held-out losses for 

autoresearch program search, small-molecule KRAS design, and antibody CDRH3 design. All three losses converge within a few dozen steps, while the held-out curves closely track the training curves. The absolute held-out losses differ by domain: 0.06 for autoresearch , 0 .38 for small-molecule design, and 0 .70 for antibody CDRH3 design. These differences reflect the different action spaces and target lengths, rather than a failure to fit the data. 64 0 100 200 300 400 500             

> Training step
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
> Loss
> fi nal eval = 0.060
> nanoGPT (autoresearch)
> Training loss Held-out eval loss
> 0100 200 300 400 500
> Training step
> 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
> Loss
> fi nal eval = 0.376
> Small-molecule (KRAS)
> Training loss Held-out eval loss
> 0200 400 600 800 1000 1200
> Training step
> 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25
> Loss
> fi nal eval = 0.705
> Antibody CDRH3
> Training loss Held-out eval loss
> In-distribution fi ne-tuning: single-task training and held-out loss

Figure 27: In-distribution single-task fine-tuning. Training loss (solid) and held-out eval-uation loss (markers) versus training step for the autoresearch , small-molecule, and antibody CDRH3 policies. All three converge within a few dozen steps, and the held-out loss tracks the training loss, confirming a faithful in-distribution fit before acquisition-loop evaluation. 

E.5 Case-level Out-of-distribution Generalisation 

To test whether it learns a transferable acquisition policy rather than memorising antigen-specific patterns, we hold two of the five antibody targets ( 1FBI X , 1H0D C ) out of training entirely, fine-tune the mixed-task model on the other three, and evaluate on the held-out pair inside the same acquisition-guided loop, antigens whose sequences and binding landscapes were never seen during training. Figure 18 shows the out-of-distribution model matches or exceeds the in-distribution model (which was trained on these antigens) on both held-out targets, and clearly beats base Qwen3.5-9B with and without chain-of-thought: it reaches −110 .57 on 1FBI X (base −109 .5, in-distribution −113 .4) and −95 .4 on 1H0D C , where it even surpasses the in-distribution model (−94 .6) and the base ( −90 .9). Since the model never observed these antigens, the gain cannot be memorisation—the distilled acquisition policy transfers to unseen targets. 

E.6 Task-level Out-of-distribution Generalisation 

The held-out-antigen study of Section E.5 still keeps antibody design inside the training mixture; it only withholds particular antigens. A more demanding question is whether the distilled behaviour survives when the entire protein task is removed. To answer it we fine-tune a chain-of-thought model on the nanoGPT and small-molecule trajectories, so that it never encounters an antibody, an Absolut binding landscape, or a single CDRH3 sequence, and then drop it, unchanged, into the antibody acquisition loop across all five antigens. Whatever competence the model shows here cannot be protein knowledge it does not possess; it can only be a task-agnostic acquisition policy carried over from the other two domains. The outcome, in Figure 19, is striking. On four of the five targets this model performs on par with the in-distribution model that was trained directly on these antigens, reaching −113 .1 on 

1FBI X (against −113 .4), −110 .3 on 1ADQ A (−109 .4), −106 .6 on 1OB1 C (−105 .5), and −104 .2on 1NSN S (−104 .7). A model that has never seen an antibody thus matches one trained on the very antigens it is tested on. The single place it falls short is 1H0D C , where it reaches only −89 .4, no better than the base proposer ( −90 .9) and well behind the in-distribution model (−94 .6), and with noticeably higher variance across seeds. That the transferred behaviour is genuinely acquisition-guided is visible in the traces themselves. Even the task-level model, which never saw a protein, conditions on the search state, anchors 65 on the best result so far, and proposes a move aimed at improving on it:         

> Task-level OOD model :“the current best sequence is LQWVSYGIPIS at −86 .83, which gives me a baseline; the other observed sequences score between −70 and −79, so this target is sensitive to small changes and I should look for a variant that approaches or surpasses the best. . . ”, then proposing QTFQNDKGLFI , which keeps a hydrophobic core (F, L, I) together with hydrogen-bonding (Q, N) and charged (K, D) residues.

Reading the chain-of-thought traces further makes the one exception clear. Inside the loop the model plays two roles at once: it selects among candidates according to the acquisition signal, and it authors new candidates de novo . These two roles come apart precisely on 1H0D C , whose landscape is unusually shallow (its best attainable energy is around −95, against −104 to −113 for the other targets) and whose optimum lies in a narrow basin that can be reached only by deliberately designing a specific aromatic/hydrophobic motif. Faced with the same situation, the two models reason quite differently:       

> In-distribution model: “the best sequences mix a hydrophobic core (L, V, I, F) with polar and aromatic residues. . . let me construct a sequence: start with Y for π-stacking, keep a hydrophobic core in the middle, and place an aromatic residue at the terminus. . . ”, yielding YRMQDQPWSLQ , a sequence that is absent from the candidate pool.
> Task-level OOD model: “I need to pick one sequence from the candidate pool of more than a thousand. . . I notice that HLFQSCVSGPL is already in the pool (id 169); it carries suitable hydrophobic and polar residues and violates none of the constraints, so I will choose it.”

Where the in-distribution model composes the required motif from scratch, the task-level model has never learned the sequence priors of the protein domain, and so retreats to picking the most promising candidate the pool already offers; on 1H0D C this ceiling coincides with the base model’s. On the remaining four antigens the optima can be found by selection alone, so carrying over the acquisition policy is sufficient and no gap appears. Taken together, the task-level experiment separates two abilities that ordinary fine-tuning leaves entangled. What our distillation transfers is the one we set out to capture, namely knowing how to use the acquisition signal to explore and exploit, and it does so across tasks that share nothing but that structure. What it does not, and should not be expected to, transfer is de novo domain design, which depends on in-domain data and returns the moment such data is available, as both the in-distribution and case-level results confirm. This clean separation, in which acquisition generalises while domain-specific design does not, accounts for exactly where the task-level model succeeds and where it does not, and shows that the recipe distils precisely what ought to be transferable. The corresponding learning curves for both OOD studies are shown in Figure 18 and Figure 19 in Section 6.4. 

E.7 Distilling Acquisition Value into the Weights 

In a standard model-based loop the epistemic value lives outside the model: a Gaussian process computes the posterior mean, uncertainty, and acquisition value, and the language model simply reads those numbers off and acts. The proposer is a value reader , not a value holder ; take the surrogate away and its competence goes with it. What we are really after is the opposite. We want the acquisition value distilled into the model’s own weights, so that the proposer develops a genuine discovery intuition: an internal, experience-formed sense of which regions are exhausted, which still hold uncertainty or information, and whether the moment calls for exploiting the current best or striking out somewhere new. This is why we hide the GP values during fine-tuning. Denied the numbers, the model has to learn the value ⇔language mapping: it must put the epistemic situation into words and act on it (“the last rounds repeated with no gain, so 66 this region is saturated; try a new direction”) rather than consume a scalar such as σ = 0 .004. Hiding the surrogate is not a handicap but the whole point: at deployment the acquisition loop hands the proposer no GP values anyway, so the intuition has to live in the model itself; and once it does, it becomes a task-agnostic search skill that carries over to discovery problems the model was never trained on (Section E.6). It is, in the end, the language-model counterpart of an experienced researcher who senses that a line of inquiry is played out, instead of computing an expected-improvement score. Concretely, reasoning augmentation can be run at two levels. In the first, the surrogate’s posterior mean, uncertainty, and acquisition value are embedded in the prompt, so the model can read the epistemic state directly. In the second, which is the variant we adopt, these Gaussian-process values are hidden : the prompt carries only the observed history of candidates actually tried and their real outcomes, and the model must infer the epistemic state itself. The two regimes reach the same acquisition decisions; what differs is where the uncertainty signal comes from. The traces below, both emitted on the autoresearch task immediately before an explore move, make the contrast concrete. 

With GP values in the prompt: uncertainty is read .   

> “Looking at the surrogate’s feedback: the latest candidate state 1808 was predicted at mean = 0 .98147 with very low uncertainty, so the surrogate is confident about this region; yet the true result 0 .98209 did not improve. So I should step outside the region the surrogate is most certain about and explore one it is less sure of.”
> The epistemic signal is taken directly from the GP’s numeric mean and uncertainty.

GP hidden (ours): uncertainty is inferred from experience .                 

> “The best is 0 .98456, but the spread across all 18 evaluated results is only ∼0.0002, likely just run-to-run noise, and there has been no improvement for 15 consecutive rounds. HEAD DIM
> and WINDOW PATTERN no longer give ameaningful signal, so Iwill open anew dimension (DEVICE BATCH SIZE ).”
> With no GP values in the prompt, the model reconstructs the same “this region is exhausted / low-information” judgement from the raw observed history, then makes the same explore decision.

The decision is identical; only the provenance of the uncertainty estimate changes. This matters less than it might seem, because the GP numbers are barely used even when they are supplied: across the reasoning-augmented training traces, only 1 .3% explicitly cite a surrogate number, whereas 97 .2% reason from the observed outcomes such as stall length, noise level, and best-so-far. Hiding the GP values therefore changes the reasoning almost not at all, while buying two concrete advantages: the training prompt now matches deployment, where the acquisition loop exposes no GP values to the proposer, and, empirically, out-of-distribution transfer improves (Section E.6). Table 8 confirms the last point quantitatively. Both fine-tuned proposers are task-level out-of-distribution, trained only on nanoGPT and small-molecule trajectories with no protein data, and they differ only in the augmentation regime: GP values embedded in the prompt versus GP hidden (ours). Hiding the GP values does not hurt and in fact helps: the GP-hidden proposer attains the best average binding energy and the best result on three of the five antigens, including a decisive −115 .9 on 1FBI X and a clear recovery on the hard 1H0D C target ( −93 .1 versus −89 .4). 67 Proposer 1ADQ 1FBI 1H0D 1NSN 1OB1 Avg 

Base +CoT −107 .9 −109 .5 −90 .9 −104 .8 −109 .1 −104 .4In-distribution FT −109 .4 −113 .4 −94 .6 −104 .7 −105 .5 −105 .5

Task-level OOD 

With GP −110 .3 −113 .1 −89 .4 −104 .2 −106 .6 −104 .7

Without GP −110 .2 −115 .9 −93 .1 −104 .9 −110 .4 −106 .9

Table 8: GP-in-prompt vs GP-hidden reasoning augmentation. Best Absolut −Ebind 

on five held-out antibody targets; the two OOD rows differ only in whether GP values appear in the prompt. Best per column in bold. Baselines and GP-in-prompt: 3 seeds; GP-hidden: seed 42. 68