Title: CorleoneGame: A library of biological dynamic games with a companion Julia solver

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.06307v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 03:00:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 108

Markdown Content:
# CorleoneGame: A library of biological dynamic games with a companion Julia solver 

## Sebastian Sager 1,2* , Christoph Plate 1,2 , Julius Martensen 1,Frank W. Ohl 1,3 

1Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany. 

2Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg, Germany. 

3Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): sager@ovgu.de; 

Abstract 

Biological agents, from regulatory modules and microbial strains to organisms and populations, act on a common environment while each responds to its own costs, benefits, and limits. A dynamic game makes such interactions explicit by assigning who controls which decision, what each participant values, and which restrictions constrain unilateral deviations. We present a library of 25 biological dynamic games with 2 to 10 players spanning molecular, cellular, organismal, and population scales and competitive, antag-onistic, mutualistic, and regulatory interactions. Instances cover single seasons, cycles that return to their initial state, or episodic tasks; seven include duration choice and some players’ feasible sets are coupled. For each game we provide biological motivation, an executable Julia specification with player-owned con-trols, objectives and restrictions, a parameter instance, and a reference open-loop generalized Nash equilibrium candidate with interpreted trajectories. The solver CorleoneGame.jl computes candidates by sequential optimal-control best responses and audits them for feasibility and profitable unilateral devia-tions on a coarse and a refined control grid. All 25 reference computations satisfy the audit tolerances on both grids. Using a plant–herbivore game as a running example, we show how an executable specification yields an audited reference candidate that qualitatively reproduces a published prediction, how biological hypotheses become instance variants with different candidates, and how the candidates generate synthetic data for inverse games. 

Keywords: Dynamic games; Open-loop generalized Nash equilibrium; Benchmark library; Optimal control; Mathematical biology; Inverse games; Julia 

1arXiv:2610.06307v1 [math.OC] 5 Oct 2026 1 Introduction 

Biological systems adapt to their environment, but also change it. A mitochondrial DNA variant that expands within a cell draws on the energy shared with the wild type; a bacterial strain that secretes an amino acid feeds a partner strain that competes with it for carbon; a person moving a handle together with a partner changes the forces the partner feels; and a tree that defends its leaves changes the food available to hatching leafminer larvae. Describing any of these actions in isolation can miss the strategic interaction. A dynamic game in continuous time, also called a differential game (Başar and Olsder 1982), makes the alternatives explicit: it specifies the interacting states, the decisions assigned to each participant, the consequences each participant values, the restrictions on its decisions, and when the interaction ends or repeats. 

Biological and mathematical context. 

Optimality models connect mechanisms with proposed criteria and feasible alter-natives (Parker and Maynard Smith 1990). Examples include foraging decisions (Stephens and Krebs 1986) and, at the molecular scale, temporal enzyme allocation, a classical optimal-control problem (Klipp et al. 2002; Oyarzún et al. 2009); dynamic optimality models are established in behavioral biology (McNamara et al. 2001). When one organism changes another’s returns, game theory provides a language for inter-action (Maynard Smith and Price 1973; Maynard Smith 1982), and game-theoretic reasoning has also been applied to biochemical and cellular processes (Schuster et al. 2008; Hummert et al. 2014). Biological dynamic games already describe seasonal plant defense and herbivore hatching (Low et al. 2013), renewable-stock harvesting (Dock-ner et al. 1989; Suri 2008), mechanically coupled human movements (Braun et al. 2009; Chackochan and Sanguineti 2019), and territorial space use (Hamelin and Lewis 2010). Other game instances in the library adapt dynamical mechanisms, such as Wilson–Cowan neural populations (Wilson and Cowan 1972), by introducing separate controls and objectives. Appendix A records this provenance for each game instance. The games cited above use different notation, control ownership, feasibility con-ventions, and levels of numerical documentation. A common library makes them accessible to biological interpretation and computational comparison. General-purpose resources such as GAMUT (Nudelman et al. 2004) and OpenSpiel (Lanctot et al. 2019) illustrate the value of shared game families and evaluation protocols; they address normal-form and extensive-form games, mostly without biological interpre-tation. SpaceGym collects discrete and differential games from noncooperative space operations, such as pursuit–evasion, for evaluating autonomy algorithms (Allen et al. 2023). Optimal-control collections provide a complementary foundation for a single decision maker (Sager 2012; Caillau et al. 2025). We are not aware of a collection of dynamic games providing biological interpretations, control ownership, individual objectives and restrictions, and open-source code. 

Game-theoretic setting. 

The library uses an open-loop information structure: each player commits to a time-dependent schedule of its decisions at the start of the interaction (Başar and Olsder 21982). Shared resources, joint floors, and periodic return bands put opponents’ deci-sions into each player’s feasible set; the equilibrium concept is therefore a generalized Nash equilibrium (Facchinei and Kanzow 2010). Such equilibria are typically not iso-lated (Section 2.3). Feedback equilibria, in which players respond to the current state (Başar and Olsder 1982; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2020), evolutionarily stable strategies (Maynard Smith and Price 1973; Maynard Smith 1982), and Stackelberg equilibria are different concepts not covered by our library (Section 2.6). 

Forward and inverse methods. 

Constrained games can be approached through best-response decomposition, in which each player’s optimal reply to fixed opponents, its best response, is computed in turn, coupled optimality systems, or variational inequalities (Facchinei and Kanzow 2010). Augmented Lagrangian methods (Kanzow and Steck 2016), ALGAMES (Le Cleac’h et al. 2021), and DG-SQP (Zhu and Borrelli 2023) offer alternatives to the sequen-tial best-response baseline used here. This baseline reuses any optimal-control solver as a black box but has no general convergence guarantee (Section 4); its results are therefore reported with independent feasibility and deviation audits. Feedback-game methods such as iterative linear–quadratic games address a different information struc-ture (Fridovich-Keil et al. 2020). A variety of different optimal control algorithms exists (Andersson et al. 2018; Verschueren et al. 2022; Patterson and Rao 2014). For inverse analysis, objectives and constraints deserve the same attention as dif-ferential equations. Low investment may reflect a small benefit, a large cost, or a binding budget. Generalized inverse optimal control treats these alternatives as model components to be inferred (Banga and Sager 2025). Banga and Villaverde (2026) order biological inverse problems from parameter identification and model discovery to inverse optimal control and inverse differential games; for the latter, inverse prob-lems have been studied for open-loop equilibria with known dynamics and constraints (Molloy et al. 2020, 2022). The library supplies forward instances for the two upper levels (Section 5.4); inverse recovery is left to future work. 

Contributions and organization of the paper. 

Section 2 defines the open-loop generalized Nash equilibrium problem and a game specification consisting of mechanism, preferences, and restrictions. Section 2.6 states general modeling assumptions. Section 3 presents 25 game instances with biological provenance, classifications (Tables 1 and 2), and dimensions (Table 3). They span four biological scales, four interaction types, and three temporal classes, and they have 2 to 10 players, 2 to 12 controls including owned durations, and up to 420 scalar constraint functions. Section 3.3 summarizes every instance by biological scale, and Appendix A contains all 25 full specifications in alphabetical order. Section 4 presents the novel modular open-source solver CorleoneGame.jl that extends the optimal control solver Corleone.jl to dynamic games. For every instance, it provides a reference open-loop generalized Nash equilibrium candidate that passes the feasibility and unilateral-deviation audits on a coarse and a refined control grid. 3Section 5 works through the tupelo–leafminer game, from the executable specifi-cation through an audited reference candidate and alternative hypotheses, formulated as instance variants, to synthetic observations for inverse games. Along the way, it addresses teachers and contributors of new instances, algorithm developers, biologists, and researchers in inverse games. Section 6 discusses limitations and next steps. 

# 2 Game formulation and biological assumptions 

## 2.1 Players, decisions, and dynamics 

The N players are labeled P = {A, B, . . . } with |P| = N . On a time horizon [0 , T ],the biological state x(t) ∈ Rnx satisfies the initial value problem 

˙x(t) = f (t, x (t), u (t); p), x(0) = x0(p). (1) for a given function f describing the dynamics and initial values x0(p). Here p denotes model parameters and fixed data, and the explicit dependence on t represents pre-scribed environmental inputs, such as seasonal or periodic supply, light, or activity drives. The vector u = ( ui)i∈P collects player-owned decisions. Ownership identifies who may change a decision. Time-varying controls are measurable schedules with componentwise bounds 

U = Y

> i∈P

[ui, u i], u(t) ∈ U for almost every t ∈ [0 , T ]. (2) In a slight abuse of notation, ui also contains bounded time-independent decisions owned by player i; for these, the bounds in (2) apply to a constant value. The library uses such a scalar decision only for the duration T , owned by player A in seven instances (Section 2.4). Other parameters or initial values could be assigned to players in the same manner. The decision space Ui of player i consists of all ui whose time-varying components are measurable and satisfy their bounds almost everywhere and whose scalar components are constant and satisfy their bounds; U = Q 

> i∈P

Ui.Figure 1 illustrates these objects for the tupelo–leafminer game, the worked exam-ple of Section 5: each of the two players owns one control uA and uB , the controls act on three biological states x = ( L, E, H ), and each player minimizes its own objective 

JA and JB , optionally subject to its own restrictions, as introduced in Section 2.2. 

## 2.2 Objectives and restrictions 

All objectives are minimized; benefits to be maximized enter with a negative sign. Player i minimizes a weighted sum of mi features, 

Ji(u) = 

> mi

X

> k=1

wki Jik (u),Jik (u) = Φ ik (x(T ), u ) + 

Z T

> 0

Lik (t, x (t), u (t); p) d t + X

> ℓ

Qikℓ (x(tikℓ ); p),

(3) 4A: tree (tupelo) B: leafminer 

leaf area L

larvae H eggs E              

> pupation κρ (L)H
> hatching feeding bρ (L)H
> defense uA(t):kills eggs and larvae hatching uB(t)
> A minimizes JA: keep much valuable leaf area at a low carbon cost of defense
> optional: effort and carbon limits UA,CA
> B minimizes JB: let many larvae pupate early at a low hatching cost
> optional: effort limit UB

Fig. 1 The tupelo–leafminer game. The tree (A) schedules its defense uA(t), which kills eggs and larvae; the leafminer (B) schedules the hatching hazard uB (t) of its eggs. Larvae feed on the leaves and leave the game by pupation. Black solid arrows denote transitions of individuals (hatching from eggs to larvae, pupation out of the larval stage); the dashed arrow denotes the loss of leaf area through larval feeding. Colored arrows denote controls that drive a transition (hatching changes eggs and larvae); colored lines ending in a bar denote controls that remove individuals (defense kills eggs and larvae). Each player minimizes its own objective; the allowances are optional restrictions, disabled in the reference instance. Section 5.1 defines all terms. 

where terms may be absent, wki ≥ 0, and P 

> k

wki = 1 ; in total, an instance has 

nw = P 

> i∈P

mi features. The terminal term Φik may depend on the scalar components of u, which allows a direct duration cost. Interior-time terms Qikℓ at fixed times 

tikℓ occur only in motor , the two other terms are standard Bolza-type terms. Each feature is divided by a fixed positive scale, listed with the parameters, which makes the features of one player comparable in magnitude; we absorb these scales into Jik .Restrictions beyond control bounds are written as nonnegative slacks, 

gi[x, u ; p] ≥ 0, (4) where the brackets indicate functionals of the whole trajectory and of the decisions. They are evaluated on the numerical state y, which augments x by quadratures of objective terms and budgets and, in ciliate and phage , uses logarithmic coordi-nates for some biological components. Quadratures are excluded from nx. Every scalar restriction c assigned to player i has the bound form 

ℓc ≤ yqc (t) ≤ rc for all t ∈ [0 , T ] (path) or for t = T (terminal) , (5) with constrained component qc, bounds ℓc ∈ R ∪ {−∞} and rc ∈ R ∪ { +∞} , and an equality for ℓc = rc. The library uses four kinds of restrictions: path floors and ceilings on biological states; integral budgets, represented by a quadrature ˙z = b(t, x, u ; p),

z(0) = 0 , and the terminal bound z(T ) ≤ B; terminal targets; and, in periodic 5instances, return bands 

xj (0) − δ ≤ xj (T ) ≤ xj (0) + δ, j = 1 , . . . , n x, (6) imposed in every player’s problem with an instance tolerance δ > 0; quadratures are excluded. A joint restriction is an identical restriction assigned to several players, i.e., a copy in each of their gi. Optional restrictions carry a switch σ ∈ { 0, 1}; σ = 0 

removes the restriction from the instance, and σ = 1 enables the stated finite bound. 

## 2.3 Open-loop generalized Nash equilibrium 

In the open-loop information structure, decisions are functions of time alone, and each player commits to its schedule at t = 0 . Let ui,v i replace only player i’s decisions by 

vi. Define Fi(u−i) as the set of vi ∈ U i for which the absolutely continuous solution of (1) under ui,v i satisfies player i’s restrictions (4). Only the restrictions assigned to player i enter Fi: restrictions are assigned to the players who are bound by them. For example, the herbivore’s hatching allowance in the allowance variant of tupelo 

(Section 5.3) restricts the herbivore but not the plant. The best-response problem is 

min  

> vi∈F i(u−i)

Ji(ui,v i ), (7) with the set of global minimizers 

Ki(u−i) = arg min 

> vi∈F i(u−i)

Ji(ui,v i ). (8) An open-loop generalized Nash equilibrium satisfies 

u∗ 

> i

∈ K i(u∗−i) for every i ∈ P . (9) Every deviation recomputes the complete coupled state. Generalized feasibility arises when Fi depends on opponents’ decisions after eliminating the states. Private control-effort budgets can retain an ordinary Nash structure. Shared biological return conditions or resource floors generally couple feasibility. When the same restriction is imposed in several players’ problems, generalized Nash equilibria are typically not isolated (Facchinei and Kanzow 2010). A frequently used refinement is the variational equilibrium, in which all players share one multiplier per shared restriction; the equilibrium definition (9) does not impose it. Section 4 computes candidates for (9) by solving discretized versions of (7) and audits them for feasibility and profitable unilateral deviations (Section 4.3). Different forward methods can therefore return different, equally valid equilibria of the same instance. 

## 2.4 Owned duration 

In many biological interactions, when an episode ends or how long a cycle lasts is itself decided by one participant: a seed cohort determines by its germination speed when 6the shared water-uptake phase ends, a host determines when an infection is cleared, and the fleet that sets the opening schedule of a fishing ground determines how long a rotation lasts. Assigning the duration to this player lets the game express a trade-off that a fixed horizon hides, between ending early, e.g., to limit exposure or to repeat the cycle more often, and the effort needed to reach the terminal state in time, which the other players shape through the common trajectory. In seven instances of the library, player A owns the horizon, i.e., T is a scalar component of uA with bounds 

T ≤ T ≤ T . We write all schedules on normalized time s ∈ [0 , 1] , with t = T s ,

ex(s) = x(T s ), and eu(s) = u(T s ), so that 

ex′(s) = T f (T s, ex(s), eu(s); p). (10) We adopt the convention that, when A changes T , the opponents keep their sched-ules as functions of s, so that all physical schedules are rescaled. This convention is part of the game definition; keeping physical-time schedules fixed would define a different game. An accumulated running cost becomes T R 10 Lik (T s, ex(s), eu(s); p) ds ,whereas a time average becomes R 10 Lik (T s, ex(s), eu(s); p) ds . This distinction matters when the duration is variable and applies equally to total and mean-effort budgets. In 

fishery and predatorPrey , the objectives are cycle averages. Non-owners influence the duration only through the trajectory and the restrictions that the owner must respect. 

## 2.5 Specification components and instance variants 

The formulation separates three components of a game specification: the mechanism ,i.e., the dynamics f , the data p, and the initial state x0 in (1); the preferences , i.e., the features Jik and weights wi in (3); and the restrictions , i.e., the control bounds (2) and the restrictions gi with their bounds, tolerances, and switches in (4)–(6). Together with the player set, the control ownership, and the horizon, they define a specification 

G =  f, p, x 0; ( Jik , w i)i∈P ; ( gi, σ )i∈P ; ownership , T .

Bounds of restrictions belong to the restrictions even where the implementation stores them with the parameters. An instance fixes all entries of G (Section 3.1). An instance variant changes one or more entries while keeping the players, the ownership, and the information structure. Accordingly, we speak of preference, restriction, and mechanism variants. They correspond to three kinds of biological hypotheses: what a player values, e.g., leaf area relative to the cost of defense; what a player can do, e.g., defend only within a carbon budget; and how the interaction works, e.g., whether feeding saturates. Alternative explanations of the same observed behavior often differ in only one of these components, so comparing such variants, and recovering them from data, is a central use of the library. Section 5.3 uses such variants to express biological hypotheses, and Section 5.4 treats entries of G as unknowns of inverse problems. 72.6 Assumptions and scope 

The following assumptions apply throughout this paper. 

Players, objectives, and constraints. 

Each instance describes deterministic aggregate dynamics conditional on prescribed initial conditions, parameters, and environmental inputs; spatial, stochastic, and individual-level mechanisms enter only through the stated reductions. Players rep-resent regulatory modules, microbial strains, organisms, or populations. Assigning independent objectives to modules within one organism is an additional modeling hypothesis. Biomass, production, and effort terms are proxies; a link to reproductive success is needed before a population objective receives a selection interpretation. Many coefficients, weights, and restrictions are synthetic, selected to expose nonlinear dynamics, different player behavior, and binding restrictions. Abstract traits, occur-rence associations, and hypothetical module objectives are not species calibrations, causal interaction estimates, or measured goals. 

Information structure. 

Open-loop schedules may approximate inherited developmental programs or repeat-able allocation schedules in predictable environments. This interpretation requires no conscious foresight; Banga and Villaverde (2026) stress that assuming a game rather than evolved regulatory programs needs independent justification in each applica-tion. Open-loop schedules do not describe responses to unexpected changes in state or environment: open-loop Nash equilibria are in general not subgame perfect, i.e., if the state is perturbed during the episode, the continuation of an equilibrium schedule need not be an equilibrium of the continuation game. Feedback (Markov) equilibria describe state-dependent responses and generally differ from the open-loop equilibria reported here. Within-episode physiology and intergenerational strategy change oper-ate on different modeled timescales. The games are simultaneous and noncooperative; the sequential best-response updates of Section 4 can be read as a learning process in which each player adapts to the others’ latest schedules, but they serve here only to compute an equilibrium, so their number of rounds and their intermediate profiles are not a model of biological learning or evolution. A biological leader in migration or germination is not a Stackelberg leader. A duration owner specifies who can alter the common schedule; for regulatory modules and predator–prey cycles, this is a syn-thetic allocation of decision authority. The additional degree of freedom is balanced by the return band (6) in the three periodic instances and by a terminal target in the four transfer tasks. Accordingly, the open-loop Nash conditions established here should not by themselves be interpreted as demonstrating evolutionary stability or resistance to invasion; establishing such properties would require an explicit evolu-tionary framework and the corresponding stability conditions (Maynard Smith and Price 1973; Maynard Smith 1982). 8Temporal classes. 

A seasonal episode can connect to the next season through an unmodeled transition 

xk+1 (0) = R(xk(T ), e k) that incorporates offseason conditions ek, mortality, reproduc-tion, dormancy, or replenishment. The game interface can represent such transitions through dynamics or endpoint restrictions, but the library currently implements none. Periodic instances describe interactions that repeat cycle after cycle, such as a daily activity cycle or a recurring supply of a culture: biologically, the state at the end of one cycle is the start of the next, and the environment repeats with the same period. Mathematically, the return band (6) imposes this repetition: every biological state must end close to its initial value. For fixed initial values, this may lead to modeling artefacts, i.e., end-of-cycle corrections in the controls. The shared return band also couples all players (Section 2.3). Episodic instances describe individual tasks, recovery, or experiments with resets. Only periodic instances impose a biological return. 

# 3 The library 

## 3.1 Curation 

A model family specifies a mechanism with configurable preferences and restrictions (Section 2.5). An instance fixes all entries of the specification G of Section 2.5; changing weights or enabling a restriction therefore creates a new instance and can change feasibility or the existence of an equilibrium. A numerical record additionally identifies grids, solver settings, and the resulting trajectories and audits. Every instance of the curated library has a complete, executable specification with distinct control ownership, documented biological motivation and temporal interpreta-tion, and a reference computation. In addition, the players must be plausible decision units, the central mechanism must be supported by a primary source, every biological state must influence the dynamics, an objective, or a restriction, and the specification must couple the players’ responses. Models whose game content rested on decorative states or on a single player’s optimal control were not included. Repeated patterns, such as squared-effort budgets, permit controlled comparisons across different coupling mechanisms. Other contrasts include private versus opponent-dependent feasibility, state and control dimensions, variable player counts, and fixed versus owned durations. 

## 3.2 Classifications and attributes 

Table 1 defines three exclusive classifications and two attributes. Each instance has exactly one biological scale, one temporal class, and one interaction type. The attributes variable-N and freeTime are nonexclusive. Seasonal and episodic instances impose no return condition. Periodic instances impose the return band (6) with the tolerance δ given by the instance parameter 

periodicity_tolerance . The library contains seven seasonal, nine periodic, and nine episodic instances. There are seven free-duration instances: four transfer tasks and three periodic instances. The other six periodic instances have fixed external clocks. The biological rationale differs across scales. Externally forced cycles represent recurring supply or activity regimes, such as periodic feeding of maintained cultures 9Table 1 Category identifiers and their description. 

Category Definition 

Biological scale (exclusive) 

molecular Biochemical species, molecular pools, or subcellular processes. 

cellular Cells or microbes as players or states. 

organismal Organisms, their movements, or their neural control. 

population Populations, communities, or colonies of multicellular organisms. 

Temporal class (exclusive) 

seasonal Finite seasonal episode; any offseason transition is outside the model. 

periodical All biological states return within a stated tolerance. 

episodical Single task, recovery, experiment, or startup transient. 

Interaction type (exclusive) 

competition Competition for a shared resource or reproductive opportunity. 

antagonism Predation, infection, or herbivory as a central interaction. 

mutualism Reciprocal benefits from exchange or service; competition may coexist. 

regulation Players regulate one coupled system toward different targets, e.g., regulatory modules of one organism or partners in a joint task. 

Attributes (nonexclusive) 

variable-N Player count N adjustable through model parameters. 

freeTime Horizon owned as a bounded scalar decision parameter. 

(algae , metabolicPathway , microbial ) or daily activity ( mitochondria ); metabolic and organellar processes are known to be organized in time (Tu et al. 2005; Witzig et al. 2020). Consumer–resource cycles, in which evolution and population dynamics interact on similar time scales (Yoshida et al. 2007), motivate predatorPrey , whose cycle is autonomous, and ciliate , whose cycle is driven by seasonal productivity. The specific forcing, controls, and individual costs remain part of each documented adapta-tion. Ten model families define their player count through parameters ( variable-N ); for periodic families, a changed player count or changed kinetics may require new initial states compatible with the cycle. 

## 3.3 The game instances at a glance 

This subsection summarizes the 25 instances by biological scale, following the order of Table 1. Each summary names the players, their decisions, and what couples them; Appendix A gives the complete specifications. 

Molecular scale. 

In circadianCycle , the ten-state oscillator of the clock proteins PER and TIM of Leloup and Goldbeter (1998) keeps its published kinetics; player A modulates per 

transcription and owns the cycle duration, while player B, the light-input path-way, controls TIM degradation. Both players prefer balanced PER/TIM levels at 10 low effort, and return bands on all ten concentrations couple their deviation sets. In metabolicPathway , two expression modules each pay for their own enzyme in a branched pathway whose common product both value, a public-goods situation in which free-riding is expected. Substrate is supplied periodically, and module-specific byproducts inhibit each module’s own reaction, so enzyme investment must be timed relative to supply and byproduct load. mitochondria treats a wild-type and a variant subpopulation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) as players that invest in biogenesis while drawing on one shared energetic pool over a daily activity cycle. The variant has a larger replication allowance but contributes less energy and is lost faster. In 

proteinFolding , two chaperone systems, i.e., helper proteins that assist folding, with different efficiencies share a consumable chaperone capacity during recovery from a stress pulse. Both value the same native protein pool and have private effort budgets, so the game isolates free-riding on assistance effort. All molecular instances assign independent objectives to regulatory modules or subpopulations within one cell, which is an additional modeling hypothesis (Section 2.6); three of the four are periodic. 

Cellular scale. 

In algae , four algal species share dissolved CO 2 and bicarbonate pools and allocate their uptake machinery between the two carbon forms over one supply cycle of a maintained culture. The uptake traits follow the four abstract types of Zhou et al. (2022), and joint return bands on all biomasses and resources couple all players. In 

batchFermentation , an upstream strain converts substrate into an intermediate that two downstream strains turn into product; the upstream strain also chooses when the batch ends. Production costs a growth burden, time is costly to the upstream strain, and a product target shared by all strains closes the episode. In biofilm , three strains on one surface divide effort between matrix production, which protects their own cells, and dispersal, while they compete for substrate and oxygen. The strains differ in how they value attached biomass relative to dispersal output, which creates a tim-ing problem between protection, growth, and departure. ciliate couples a bacterium that expresses grazing defense with a ciliate, a single-celled grazer, that adjusts its feeding activity over an annual cycle; both phenotypes follow the commanded levels with a delay. Return bands on densities and phenotypes couple the two deviation sets. In immuneClearance , the host activates cytotoxic responses, which kill infected cells, and antibody responses and ends the infection episode, whereas the virus invests in immune evasion to maximize its accumulated viral load. The clearance target restricts only the host; the virus is bound by its own evasion budget alone. microbial extends the two-strain cross-feeding game of Banga and Villaverde (2026), which these authors use as a common example for all four levels of inverse problems, to ten strains in recip-rocal pairs, each secreting one metabolite that its partner requires while all compete for carbon under a periodic feed. With 21 biological states and 420 scalar constraint functions, it is the largest instance of the library. In phage , a bacterial population invests in resistance at a cost in growth, and a phage population adjusts the average infectivity of its progeny within one growth episode. Expressed resistance and infec-tivity follow the commanded levels with a delay. woundRepair assigns inflammatory recruitment, fibroblast recruitment, and oxygen support to three players who weigh 11 effort, excess inflammation, and collagen quality differently. Inflammatory recruitment owns the completion time, and the episode ends when the wound deficit has fallen to a prescribed residual size; a free duration thus arises without periodicity. The cellular instances cover all four interaction types; five of the eight are episodic. 

Organismal scale. 

In avoidance , two decentralized control modules time their effort in a signaled avoid-ance trial: acting builds readiness but depletes a shared, slowly recovering motivational resource. Each module benefits in part from the other’s readiness, so the players are partially aligned. motor follows the joint-action experiments of Chackochan and Sanguineti (2019): two people move mechanically coupled handles through different private via-points toward a common target. Its linear dynamics and quadratic costs make it a candidate for an analytical cross-check of numerical equilibria. In neural ,two regulators drive the excitatory and inhibitory populations of a Wilson–Cowan circuit (Wilson and Cowan 1972) toward different activity targets under a periodic background drive. Both activities must return to their initial values after one cycle. All three organismal instances are regulation games between modules or partners; 

motor retains published mechanical coefficients. 

Population scale. 

In antColonies , three neighboring colonies allocate workers among food foraging, water collection, and territorial aggression during one season. Stored food becomes brood and later workers, so allocations have delayed consequences; effort budgets and a food-store floor restrict each colony. fishery models one rotation of a rotationally managed fishing ground: two fleets harvest a logistic stock, and fleet A also chooses the rotation length. Catch quotas and an approximate stock return connect consec-utive openings; the stock and cost structure follow Suri (2008). In foraging , three foragers deplete a shared renewable food patch and convert food into reserves and a retained harvest. A management floor keeps the patch above 70% of its carrying capacity and thereby couples their feasible sets. In plantNitrogen , three plants com-pete for an early-spring nitrogen pulse that builds photosynthetic capacity while they shade one another. A shared floor on soil nitrogen represents the concentration at which net uptake ceases. plantWater lets four plants allocate root investment across three soil layers during a season with a wet first and a dry second half. The plants specialize on different layers, and a seasonal water-uptake allowance limits each of them. In pollination , two plant species invest in nectar and two pollinator species allocate their visits among the plants during one flowering season. Effort budgets and population floors restrict all four players. predatorPrey describes an autonomously oscillating community of three prey and two predator species; prey invest in defense or growth, predators in hunting or maintenance. Prey species A chooses the cycle length, which no external clock imposes. In seedGermination , three seed cohorts draw on one water pool during imbibition, the water uptake that precedes germination; fast activa-tion secures early emergence but consumes water that the neighbors need. The window ends when the leading cohort reaches radicle emergence, i.e., its embryonic root breaks through the seed coat, and cohort A owns this duration. sexRatio adapts local mate 12 competition (Hamilton 1967), in which brothers compete for mates and mothers there-fore produce few sons: three foundresses, females that found a local brood, choose the male fraction of their offspring and provision their brood from a shared, season-ally replenished resource. A synthetic floor on this resource couples their feasible sets. 

tupelo is the plant–herbivore game discussed in Figure 1 and in Section 5. Seven of the ten population instances are seasonal, and seven describe competition. 

## 3.4 Common instance schema 

All instances are documented in the same schema. The appendix records biological context and provenance before the equations, followed by the parameter defaults and an interpretation of the saved trajectory. Published equations or coefficients, reduc-tions, and introduced game components are identified separately. Table 2 lists the classifications and attributes of every instance. Its dimensions appear in Table 3 and, per player, with each specification. 

Table 2 : Library overview with classifications of Table 1. Case Scale Temporal Type variable-N freeTime algae cellular periodical competition yes no 

antColonies population seasonal competition yes no 

avoidance organismal episodical regulation no no 

batchFermentation cellular episodical mutualism no yes 

biofilm cellular episodical competition yes no 

ciliate cellular periodical antagonism no no 

circadianCycle molecular periodical regulation no yes 

fishery population periodical competition no yes 

foraging population episodical competition yes no 

immuneClearance cellular episodical antagonism no yes 

metabolicPathway molecular periodical regulation no no 

microbial cellular periodical mutualism yes no 

mitochondria molecular periodical regulation no no 

motor organismal episodical regulation no no 

neural organismal periodical regulation no no 

phage cellular episodical antagonism no no 

plantNitrogen population seasonal competition yes no 

plantWater population seasonal competition yes no 

pollination population seasonal mutualism yes no 

predatorPrey population periodical antagonism yes yes 

proteinFolding molecular episodical regulation no no 

seedGermination population seasonal competition no yes 

sexRatio population seasonal competition yes no 

tupelo population seasonal antagonism no no 

woundRepair cellular episodical regulation no yes 

13 4 Solving the games with CorleoneGame.jl 

## 4.1 Interface and optimal-control subproblems 

The solver CorleoneGame.jl builds on the optimal-control package Corleone.jl 

(SciML n.d.). The game extension, the case files, and this manuscript were developed with an AI coding agent under the authors’ supervision; its role is described in the statement on the use of generative AI at the end of the article. Each case file imple-ments the specification G of Section 2.5 together with numerical options. The solver fixes the opponents’ decisions and assembles only the active player’s objective and restrictions, i.e., a discretization of the best-response problem (7). Controls are piece-wise constant on M equal intervals, owned scalar decisions such as the duration are optimization parameters, and path restrictions are imposed at sample points within each interval. The reference records use single shooting, which eliminates the states by numerical integration, and the interior-point solver Ipopt. Appendix B lists the integrator, tolerances, derivatives, and further options. 

## 4.2 Sequential response iteration and refinement 

Algorithm 1 states the implemented baseline. Updates are sequential, so later play-ers see earlier updates from the same round. Each response is damped, ui ←

(1 − α)ui + αbui, including owned scalar decisions. With α = 1 , the sweep is the nonlin-ear Gauss–Seidel-type method described by Facchinei and Kanzow (2010); damping with α < 1 is a heuristic modification. The same damped best-response iteration with a subsequent unilateral-deviation check is used in the Level-4 case study of Banga and Villaverde (2026). If the whole sequence of profiles of such a method converges, its limit is an equilibrium, but conditions that guarantee convergence are typically not known or very restrictive, and generalized problems require additional properties of the constraints (Facchinei and Kanzow 2010). The iteration therefore has no general convergence guarantee for this library. In mitochondria , for example, tight return bands let successive best responses drift along a family of generalized equilibria, which are not isolated; the looser band of the reference instance avoids this drift. The defaults are M0 = 10 and M1 = 40 . The damping ranges from α = 0 .15 to 

α = 1 ; instance-specific values are listed in Appendix B. 

## 4.3 Audits and acceptance 

An audit asks, for each player separately, whether it could have done better by chang-ing only its own schedule while all other players keep theirs. It evaluates every player’s deviation against the same completed profile and thus tests the equilibrium condition (9). With a positive reporting scale γi, the observed normalized gain is 

b∆i = max {0, J i(u) − Ji(ui, bvi )}

γi

, (11) where bvi is the lowest-cost feasible response found by a local solve from a single start per player and round; all reference records use γi = 1 . The violation Vi of player i sums, 14 Algorithm 1 Sequential response baseline with independent audits 

Require: Game specification, grids M0 < M 1, initial profile, tolerances, damping α 

> 1:

for M ∈ { M0, M 1} do  

> 2:

if M = M1 then  

> 3:

Transfer the coarse controls by interval averaging  

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

for k = 1 , . . . , k max do  

> 6:

for i ∈ P in the order A, B, . . . do  

> 7:

Solve player i’s shooting problem with current opponents fixed  

> 8:

Independently check the response (stop on failure)  

> 9:

ui ← (1 − α)ui + αbui for owned controls and scalar decisions  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Reintegrate the completed profile with tighter tolerances  

> 12:

Audit all unilateral deviations against that same profile  

> 13:

Save objectives, gains, violations, and a trajectory snapshot  

> 14:

if max i Vi ≤ εg and max i b∆i ≤ εJ then  

> 15:

Mark this grid converged and leave the round loop  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

If kmax is reached, report this grid as not converged  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

return Profile, per-grid convergence flags, histories, and saved outputs over its controls and its restrictions in the bound form (5), the largest excess over the bounds at the audit sample times (13). A grid is accepted when max i Vi ≤ εg = 10 −6

and max i b∆i ≤ εJ = 2 · 10 −5. Each round uses one response sweep and one full deviation audit, hence 2N optimal-control calls. In addition, every response is checked by an independent reintegration. 

## 4.4 Reference records 

Table 3 summarizes the saved iterations.csv files. All 25 records contain 10- and 40-interval stages that satisfy the acceptance test. Each instance provides the saved trajectories, controls, iteration histories including the controls after every outer round, and plots of its reference computation. Across the instances, the largest final normalized gain is 1.959 · 10 −5 (foraging ), and the largest violation is 9.070 · 10 −7 (antColonies ). The coarse stage requires 2–41 rounds, and the refined stage 1–35. The round counts are unrelated to the problem dimensions (rank correlations with N , nx, nu, nw, and ng between −0.27 and 0.29 ): the small games tupelo and neural need 40 and 31 coarse rounds, whereas the largest instance, 

microbial , needs 3 and 1. The median CPU time of one optimal-control solve ranges from 0.025 s to 4.4 s on the coarse grid and from 0.16 s to 76 s on the refined grid, where it is 5 to 27 times larger. It grows with the state and control dimensions (rank correlations of about 0.7 with nx and nu, at most 0.37 with N and ng ), but on the refined grid the three instances with exact Hessians (Appendix B) are the most expensive per solve, ahead of microbial with 21 states and 420 scalar constraint functions. 15 Table 3 : Dimensions and results for 10 (coarse) and 40 (refined) control intervals. CPU is the median time [s] of one optimal-control solve. Coarse grid Refined grid Case N nx nu nw ng Rounds CPU Rounds CPU T

algae 4 6 4 12 48 41 0.215 13 1.350 60 

antColonies 3 11 9 9 6 20 0.902 35 7.999 6

avoidance 2 4 2 8 0 5 0.025 2 0.157 12 

batchFermentation 3 6 4 9 9 3 1.371 1 37 .316 4.07393 

biofilm 3 8 6 9 9 12 0.601 5 5.775 12 

ciliate 2 4 2 6 18 13 0.158 10 1.057 20 

circadianCycle 2 10 3 6 44 6 4.448 6 75 .646 24 .0425 

fishery 2 1 3 4 8 2 0.049 2 0.649 5.39474 

foraging 3 7 3 6 6 7 0.168 10 1.862 10 

immuneClearance 2 6 4 5 5 4 0.804 2 20 .724 2.93398 

metabolicPathway 2 6 2 4 26 9 0.055 4 0.404 12 

microbial 10 21 10 40 420 3 2.231 1 15 .370 80 

mitochondria 2 5 2 6 22 10 0.205 11 1.169 40 

motor 2 16 4 10 0 22 1.121 13 11 .735 0.5

neural 2 2 2 6 8 31 0.126 20 0.752 100 

phage 2 5 2 6 2 15 0.086 8 0.464 8

plantNitrogen 3 7 3 9 6 11 0.207 11 1.976 12 

plantWater 4 19 12 12 4 27 0.955 4 8.882 8

pollination 4 6 6 12 8 12 0.428 4 4.444 8

predatorPrey 5 5 11 15 55 22 0.769 2 5.288 17 .4166 

proteinFolding 2 4 2 4 2 9 0.057 3 0.413 8

seedGermination 3 7 4 9 9 2 0.078 1 1.336 3.07319 

sexRatio 3 7 3 9 6 10 0.104 3 1.358 6

tupelo 2 3 2 7 0 40 0.064 17 0.740 8

woundRepair 3 5 4 9 9 2 0.090 1 1.361 7.33042 

# 5 Working with the library: the tupelo game 

This section follows one instance, the tupelo–leafminer game, through the steps a user of the library might take. Section 5.1 translates biological assumptions into an executable specification, and Section 5.2 computes and audits a reference candidate. Section 5.3 changes the specification to express an alternative hypothesis, namely that defense is limited by a carbon budget rather than by the declining value of the leaves, and shows that it leads to a different candidate. Section 5.4 uses the resulting candidates to set up synthetic inverse problems. Each step relies on the objects introduced in the previous one. This path is also a teaching exercise. 

## 5.1 From biological assumptions to an executable game 

The tupelo–leafminer interaction illustrates strategic timing within a season (Low et al. 2013). Player A, the tree, invests in leaf defense uA; player B, the leafminer, an insect whose larvae feed inside the leaves, chooses a hatching hazard uB for its eggs. 16 Figure 1 in Section 2 summarizes the game. Leaf area L, eggs E, and larvae H satisfy 

˙L = −bρ (L)H, 

˙E = −(uB + μE + dE uA)E, 

˙H = uB E − (μH + dH uA + κρ (L)) H. 

(12) Defense reduces egg and larval survival; hatching controls when larvae encounter defense and available leaf tissue. The reference instance follows the model of Low et al. (2013), in which consumption is proportional to larval density and larvae pupate, i.e., enter the pupal stage and leave the leaf, at a constant rate, i.e., ρ(L) = 1 . The alter-native of Section 5.3 uses the saturation ρ(L) = L/ (K + L) instead. The plant values leaf area weighted by p(t) and pays tissue-weighted defense costs; the herbivore values maturation weighted by ω(t) and pays an egg-weighted hatching cost: 

JA = −w1

> A

Z T

> 0

p(t)L dt + w2

> A

Z T

> 0

uAL dt + w3

> A

Z T

> 0

u2

> A

L dt − w4

> A

L(T ),JB = −w1

> B

Z T

> 0

ω(t)κρ (L)H dt + w2

> B

Z T

> 0

u2 

> B

E dt − w3 

> B

H(T ),

with the photoperiod (day-length) curve p(t) = e−(t/t ∗)z

and ω(t) = e−δB t of Low et al. (2013). With w1 

> A

= w2

> A

, the first two terms of JA are proportional to their net carbon gain R (p(t) − uA)L dt, and the first term of JB is their pupation payoff. The reference weights are wA = (0 .49 , 0.49 , 0.02 , 0) and wB = (0 .98 , 0.02 , 0) . The small quadratic terms are not part of the published payoffs; they regularize the best responses, whose optimal controls are otherwise singular or bang-bang (Low et al. 2013). The rates follow coevolution scenario 11 of Low et al. (2013) (defense lethality 

0.5 per day, half of the larvae lost to background mortality, larval life span 25 days), mapped to one time unit of 25 days, so that T = 8 corresponds to a season of 200 days:                        

> κμHdHdEμEbδBz
> per day (Low et al. 2013) 0.04 0.04 0.50.01 00.06 0.005 9
> per time unit (reference) 1112 .50.25 01.50.125 9

Egg mortality is neglected, as in their model. Low et al. (2013) state no value for the photoperiod scale t∗; we assume t∗ = 6 (150 days), so that the leaf value halves near the end of the growing season. The season length of 200 days is inferred from the time axes of their figures. Optional allowances restrict the players’ effort and the tree’s carbon use: 

σUA



UA −

Z T

> 0

uA dt



≥ 0, σUB



UB −

Z T

> 0

uB dt



≥ 0, σCA



CA −

Z T

> 0

uAL dt



≥ 0.

17 The carbon allowance CA depends on the opponent through leaf area; the two effort allowances do not. As in Low et al. (2013), all switches are σ = 0 in the reference instance; the alternative of Section 5.3 enables them. The implementation loads CorleoneGame.jl , which defines the module 

CorleoneGame , and an instance: 

include("tupelo/tupelo.jl") using .CorleoneGame a = Tupelo.Parameters() 

With the coefficients of Appendix A.24, the dynamics callback of tupelo/tupelo.jl 

implements mechanism and quadratures for objectives and constraints:  

> 47

leaf_value(t,a)=a.photoperiod ? exp(-(t/a.t_star)^a.z) : exp(-a.p_decay*t)  

> 48 49

function dynamics!(dx, x, controls, t, a)  

> 50

L, E, H = x[1:3]  

> 51

u, v = controls  

> 52

g = a.saturation ? L / (a.K + L) : one(L)  

> 53

dx[1] = -a.b * g * H  

> 54

dx[2] = -(v + a.muE + a.dE * u) * E  

> 55

dx[3] = v * E - (a.muH + a.dH * u + a.kappa * g) * H  

> 56

wp = a.w_A ./ a.scales_P  

> 57

wh = a.w_B ./ a.scales_H  

> 58

dx[4] = -(wp[1] * leaf_value(t, a) - wp[2] * u - wp[3] * u^2) * L  

> 59

dx[5] = -wh[1] * exp(-a.q_decay * t) * a.kappa * g * H + wh[2]*v^2*E  

> 60

dx[6] = u  

> 61

dx[7] = v  

> 62

dx[8] = u * L  

> 63

return nothing  

> 64

end 

Line 47 defines the leaf value p(t), with an exponential alternative e−δAt. Line 52 selects ρ(L), and lines 53–55 implement (12). Lines 56–59 accumulate the running parts of JA and JB , including the fixed feature scales, and lines 60–62 accumulate the three allowance integrals. 1 The objective callback adds the terminal terms, and the constraint callback turns every enabled allowance into a terminal bound on the corresponding integral, owned by the restricted player:  

> 66

function objective(x,player,a)  

> 67

return player==1 ? x[4]-a.w_A[4]/a.scales_P[4]*x[1] :  

> 68

x[5]-a.w_B[3]/a.scales_H[3]*x[3]  

> 69

end  

> 70 71

function constraints(a)  

> 72

bounds = StateConstraint[]  

> 73

for (player,index,bound,label) in ((1,6,a.U_A,"budget u 1"),(2,7,a.U_B, "budget u 2"),(1,8,a.C_A,"carbon budget"))  

> 74

bound===nothing || push!(bounds,StateConstraint(;player,index, label,upper=bound))  

> 75

end 

The remaining lines of constraints only number the plot labels. The game construc-tor (lines 107–121 of the case file) collects these pieces with state and control labels,                              

> 1Code names map to the notation of (12) as u=uA,v=uB,g=ρ(L),muE =μE,muH =μH,dE =dE,
> dH =dH,kappa =κ,p_decay =δA, and q_decay =δB;nothing corresponds to σ= 0 .

18 Fig. 2 Results of Algorithm 1 applied to the tupelo reference instance. (a) Normalized gains of the tree (Player A, blue) and the leafminer (B, ochre) per outer round on the coarse grid (rounds 1– 40) and the refined grid (after the dotted line); the gray line marks the tolerance εJ . Violations are not shown, since the instance has no restrictions. (b) Profiles of defense uA (blue) and hatching uB

> (ochre) after the damped update of coarse rounds 1, 2, and 40, from light to dark.

the ownership of uA by A and uB by B, the control bounds (2), the initial state, and the indices of the quadratures and running objectives. A new game instance follows the same construction: define its parameters and callbacks, then provide a Game . A contributed instance consists of one case file with a Parameters structure, the dynamics, objective, and constraint callbacks, validation functions, and a game constructor. 

## 5.2 Computing and auditing a reference candidate 

The specification of Section 5.1 is solved by Algorithm 1 (Section 4.2) and accepted by the audit of Section 4.3: 

g = Tupelo.game(a) options = Tupelo.algorithm_options(intervals=10, refined_intervals=40) result = run_game(g; options, folder="tupelo/teaching_output") 

The instance uses the damping α = 0 .2. With α = 0 .5, the normalized gains of the tree oscillated between about 10 −2 and 5 · 10 −2 over 200 rounds without converging; Low et al. (2013) also report that simple best-response iteration did not converge for their model and use damping. Figure 2(a) shows the audit history of the reference record. The coarse grid converges after 40 rounds and the refined grid after 17. No restriction is enabled, so all violations are zero, and the normalized gain of the tree determines the round count. Figure 2(b) shows how the profiles change over the outer rounds on the coarse grid. The first rounds keep defense and hatching nearly constant in time. By round 40, defense on the coarse grid decreases to zero at t = 4 , and hatching is low early and maximal after t = 4 . The refined grid then resolves the early hatching pulse and the end of defense. 19 The reference candidate combines low, early defense with delayed mass hatching. The tree defends with at most 0.30 , mostly between 0.1 and 0.2, and stops defending at t ≈ 4.4. The leafminer releases a small hatching pulse at the start, hatches at a reduced hazard of about 0.2–0.3 while defense lasts, and hatches at maximal hazard from t ≈ 4.2 until shortly before T . The corresponding states are shown in Figure 3. Larvae remain at low density, below 0.08 , with a maximum at t ≈ 4.5; eggs decline to 

0.26 by t = 4 and are nearly exhausted by t = 6 . Leaf area falls to 0.50 ; about half of the loss (46%) occurs after t = 4 .These features agree qualitatively with the coevolutionary results of Low et al. (2013): defense early in the season with a low larval density permitted, relaxation of defense before the end of the season, an early pulse of “sneakers”, and mass hatching after defense has ended, which shifts consumption to later in the season. The onset of maximal hatching at t ≈ 4.2 corresponds to day 105 of the mapped season, close to the mass emergence on days 106–127 reported by Low et al. (2013). One difference remains: the leafminer does not avoid defense completely but hatches at a reduced rate while defense lasts, and defense is used rather than only threatened. We interpret this as a consequence of the open-loop information structure. The saved iteration history is also the unit of comparison for algorithm devel-opers. Algorithm 1 can be replaced by another forward dynamic-game solver while retaining the same dynamics, objectives, ownership, and restrictions. Alter-natively, one may keep the response iteration and replace its control transcription or nonlinear-programming backend. Comparable records contain feasibility and unilateral-deviation evidence on the same instance, as in Figure 2, together with run-time environment and discretization choices. The reference candidate is the baseline for the variants of Section 5.3 and the data source of Section 5.4. 

## 5.3 Alternative hypotheses as instance variants 

The reference candidate of Section 5.2 results from specific modeling choices. A biolog-ical hypothesis about the interaction corresponds to an instance variant (Section 2.5), i.e., to changes in one or more components of the specification in Section 5.1. For tupelo, preference variants change the weights wA, w B or the value functions p, ω ;

restriction variants change the switches σ or the bounds UA, U B , C A; and mechanism 

variants change the dynamics (12), e.g., the saturation ρ, the rates, or a fixed hatching schedule. Many variants are possible. A positive terminal weight w3 

> B

rewards larvae that mature after T (preference variant); C_A=1.0 enables the opponent-dependent carbon allowance, whereas U_A=2.0 enables only an effort allowance (restriction vari-ants); fixing uB to a prescribed schedule reduces the game to A’s optimal-control problem (mechanism variant). A preference variant alters what a player prefers, whereas a restriction variant alters what a player may do; students can identify why enabling CA also changes how B’s decisions affect A’s feasible set. As an example, the alternative instance tupelo/tupelo_allowance.jl expresses a different biological hypothesis: the tree’s defense is limited by a carbon budget rather than by the declining value of its leaves, in a regime of mild defense lethality. It differs from the reference in all three components. 20 • Restrictions: it enables the carbon allowance CA = 1 and the effort allowances 

UA = 2 and UB = 3 .5.• Mechanism: it uses the saturation ρ(L) with K = 0 .15 , egg mortality μE = 0 .025 ,mild lethality dE = 0 .05 , d H = 1 .2, and rates b = 0 .55 , μH = 0 .1, κ = 0 .65 .• Preferences: it uses the exponentially declining leaf value e−0.2t, ω(t) = e−0.06 t, and the weights wA = (100 , 8, 15 , 0) /123 and wB = (40 , 1, 0) /41 .The alternative converges in 19 rounds on 10 intervals and in 5 rounds on 40 intervals, with damping α = 0 .5. On the coarse grid, the normalized gains fall below 

εJ from round 10 on, whereas the violation of the carbon allowance delays convergence until round 19; here feasibility, not optimality, governs the round count. The tree raises its defense to about 0.44 almost immediately and lowers it to zero by t ≈ 4.4, when its carbon allowance is exhausted ( R T 

> 0

uAL dt = CA). The effort allowance is not binding (R T 

> 0

uA dt ≈ 1.15 < U A). The leafminer releases a first pulse, keeps hatching low while defense is strong, and hatches at maximal hazard during t ≈ 3.4–5, exhausting its hatching allowance. Larvae stay near 0.17 –0.19 during the first half of the season, and leaf area levels off at 0.54 .The two candidates support different biological readings. In the reference, defense ends because the remaining value of the leaves no longer justifies it, larval density stays low while defense lasts, and 46% of the leaf loss occurs after t = 4 . In the alternative, defense ends because the carbon budget is exhausted, larvae feed at high density from the start, and only 33% of the leaf loss occurs after t = 4 . The alternative thus describes an ongoing conflict in the early part of the season, whereas the reference shifts herbivory to later in the season, as in Low et al. (2013). Figure 3 compares both candidates with synthetic observations. 

## 5.4 Synthetic observations and inverse games 

The saved reference candidate of Section 5.2 can generate observations without another optimization. The supplied tupelo_synthetic.jl linearly interpolates all three biological states at 20 irregular times and adds independent Gaussian noise with standard deviation 0.02 and seed 20260908 : 

> include("tupelo/tupelo_synthetic.jl") main() # writes tupelo/output/tupelo_synthetic.csv

Figure 3 shows these observations with the reference candidate. The general 

create_synthetic_data utility additionally accepts observation times, a random seed, and state-specific noise levels. The variants of Section 5.3 define the hypothesis space of an inverse problem. Banga and Villaverde (2026) arrange biological inverse problems in four levels of increasing ambition: (1) parametric identification of a known model, (2) model discov-ery, in which structure and parameters are inferred, (3) inverse optimal control, which infers the objective of a single decision maker, and (4) inverse differential games, which infer the individual objectives of several interacting agents. In the first two levels the controls are known inputs; in the upper two they are the behavior to be explained. The tupelo variants map onto this hierarchy. Mechanism variants with changed rates 21 Fig. 3 States of the tupelo reference candidate (solid lines) and of the allowance alternative of Section 5.3 (dashed lines), together with the synthetic observations generated from the reference candidate (points). The observation-generation script specifies times, noise level, and seed, so this experiment can be repeated from the saved trajectory. 

are Level-1 problems when the schedules uA and uB are observed, and a changed saturation ρ is a Level-2 question. Fixing uB to its observed schedule reduces the game to the tree’s optimal-control problem, whose unknown weights wA form a Level-3 problem. Preference variants with unknown wA and wB are the Level-4 problem, studied for open-loop equilibria by Molloy et al. (2020, 2022). Restriction variants add a dimension that the four levels do not separate: generalized inverse optimal con-trol treats restrictions as model components to be inferred (Banga and Sager 2025), in Levels 3 and 4 alike. Figure 3 also shows the candidate of the allowance alterna-tive, which differs from the reference in all three components. Differences in the data can therefore not be attributed to one component; Banga and Villaverde (2026) call such trade-offs between objective and mechanism cross-level compensation. Leaf area separates the candidates only weakly: the trajectories differ by at most 0.046 . Eggs and larvae separate them clearly, with differences of up to 0.19 and 0.14 . The root-mean-square residuals of the alternative with respect to the observations are 0.10 for eggs and 0.09 for larvae, compared with 0.02 for the reference and the noise stan-dard deviation 0.02 . Whether such data suffice to identify individual components is an identifiability question that this forward comparison does not answer. A controlled inverse benchmark on this instance can proceed as follows. The dynamics and the observation model, i.e., observed states, times, and noise distribu-tion, are given, and a subset of the specification is hidden, for example wA and wB

(preferences) or the switches and bounds of the allowances (restrictions); in terms of Section 2.5, the hidden entries of G are the unknowns. A method succeeds if it recovers the hidden components within a stated tolerance and if the recovered game, solved and audited as in Sections 5.2 and 4.3, reproduces the observations. Because generalized Nash equilibria are typically not isolated (Section 2.3), a recovered speci-fication can reproduce the data through another equilibrium of the same game, and a 22 correct specification can fail to reproduce them through equilibrium selection. Banga and Villaverde (2026) name further Level-4 difficulties that the library allows to study in a controlled way: permutation symmetry of players with similar roles, cooperative mimicry of a single aggregate optimizer, and an unknown number of players, which the variable-N instances can vary. Reports should therefore state the forward solver, its initializations, and whether several observation scenarios or initializations were used to assess ambiguities between weights, restrictions, and equilibrium selection. No inverse experiment is reported here. 

# 6 Discussion and outlook 

The library provides 25 executable game specifications from the molecular to the population scale, each with a parameter instance, an audited reference candidate, and an interpretation of the candidate. The common specification makes preferences, restrictions, and decision ownership explicit, so that alternative biological hypotheses become instance variants that can be solved and compared with the same method. The tupelo example in Section 5 shows this use in a chain of steps: an executable specification yields an audited reference candidate; changes of preferences, restrictions, or mechanisms turn biological hypotheses into instance variants; and the candidates generate synthetic observations whose hypothesis space for inverse games is defined by these variants. The reference instance, mapped from a published scenario of Low et al. (2013), reproduces their delayed mass hatching qualitatively, but not their complete conflict avoidance, which we attribute to the open-loop information structure: in their model, the plant can respond to the current larval density with induced defense, so that the threat of defense alone deters early hatching, whereas a schedule fixed at the start of the season cannot respond to larval density, and defense must therefore be used rather than only threatened. The reference candidates have the limitations stated in Sections 2.6 and 4.3: they are open-loop, need not be unique, and are accepted on two control grids by local solves; they carry no certificate of an exact continuous-time equilibrium. Most param-eters are synthetic. The sequential iteration has no general convergence guarantee, and in some periodic instances only a looser return band yields convergence. These limitations define the next steps. Inverse games can start from the hypothesis spaces of Section 5, ideally with real-world data. Feedback equilibria for selected instances would show whether conclusions such as the tupelo comparison depend on the information structure, and hence which hypotheses remain plausible for given synthetic or real-world data. Simultaneous or extrapolated updates, multiple shooting, and methods for equilibrium selection can be compared on the same audits. Calibrated instances, multiseason models with an explicit offseason map, and scalability studies with a variable number of players extend the library in further directions. The code, the saved candidates, and the scripts that generate all tables and figures are available (see the code availability statement). Each instance is also documented in the category of dynamic games of the benchmark library https://mintoc.de (Sager 2012), whose category system includes the classifications of Table 1, so that new instances and methods can be added and compared with the reference results. 23 Statements and Declarations 

Funding. 

The project has been funded by the European Regional Development Fund under the European Union’s Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Program via grants intelAlgen ZS/2023/12/182064, timingMatters ZS/2023/12/182063, and Center for Dynamic Systems ZS/2023/12/182075, which we gratefully acknowledge. 

Competing interests. 

None. 

Ethics approval and consent to participate. 

Not applicable. 

Consent for publication. 

Not applicable. 

Data availability. 

No experimental data were used. The saved reference candidates (controls, trajecto-ries, iteration histories, and solver logs) and the synthetic observations of Section 5 are part of the code repository. 

Materials availability. 

Not applicable. 

Code availability. 

The solver, the implementations of all 25 game instances, and the scripts that gen-erate all tables and figures of this paper are available at https://github.com/SciML/ Corleone.jl with fixed package versions. 

Author contributions. 

Conceptualization: SS; Methodology: SS; Software: JM, CP, SS; Validation: SS; Writ-ing – original draft: SS; Writing – review and editing: all authors; Supervision: SS; Funding acquisition: SS; Biological interpretation: FO, KR, SS. 

Use of generative AI. 

The project was developed with extensive use of Claude Code 2.1.285 using Opus 5.5. The agent’s behavior was constrained by instructions that prohibited invented refer-ences, data, and results and required unverified statements to be marked. The authors specified all tasks in approximately 100 human-in-the-loop prompts. The agent imple-mented parts of CorleoneGame.jl ; formulated and implemented the game instances from biological settings chosen by the authors; ran all computations and generated tables and figures; searched the literature; and drafted and revised parts of the text. The authors checked all model equations, provenance statements, references, and the overall text. They take full responsibility for the contents of this article. 24 A Game specifications 

Each game instance uses the notation from Section 2. Players are indexed by P =

{A, B, . . . } with |P| = N ; player-indexed tuples and parameter rows follow this alpha-betical order. Numeric subscripts on the full state vector x or numerical state y denote component positions, not player names. The position map is ι(A) = 1 , ι (B) = 2 , . . . .Local biochemical and resource indices retain their stated meanings. Unless a game instance defines a smaller group, sums over player indices run over P.Parameter listings reproduce the Julia parameter fields, with tuples and matrices in code order. The correspondence to mathematical notation should be clear from the context. The fixed horizon is T; for free-time instances, duration initializes the opti-mized horizon reported in the numerical record. Initial physical values and bounds are specified by these fields; objective and budget quadratures start at zero. The field 

initial is the initial control guess of the solver, and numerical_x0 is the initial numerical state including quadratures. A nothing entry disables an optional restric-tion. Enabled-bound tables use numerical-state coordinates y, including quadratures and any log transformation. Return bands are written in physical biological coordi-nates x; control boxes are listed separately. A local gi ≥ 0 slack convention is equivalent to (4) with the same sign convention. Categories describe the enabled instance. 

Reading the figures. The first panel shows the displayed differential states. The second shows piecewise-constant controls; parentheses identify their owner. The third, when present, shows constraint slacks. A lower bound has slack xj − xj and an upper bound has slack xj − xj . A shared restriction is drawn once and lists all owners. Slack labels g1, g 2, . . . follow the row order of the instance’s enabled-bounds table; return bands are omitted from the numbering. Solid curves denote path restrictions; dotted curves and terminal markers denote endpoint restrictions. Values along a dotted curve before T are contextual, not additional path requirements. The label is violated below 

−10 −4, active up to 10 −3, and otherwise inactive , based on the minimum path slack or terminal slack. Equalities use the absolute residual with a negative sign for this classification. These display thresholds differ from the solver’s acceptance tolerance. Return bands are hidden in the plot. Axes show physical time. 

A common template for transfer tasks. Three free-duration transfer tasks (batchFermentation , seedGermination , woundRepair ) share one template: a dura-tion cost for the owner, squared effort, an instance-specific running cost, a terminal target shared by all players, private effort budgets, and one path restriction per player. These instances are deliberately weakly coupled: an equilibrium candidate is found within a few outer rounds, the path restrictions are synthetic and inactive in the reference records, and the timing is governed by the shared target and the owner’s time cost. They serve as easy benchmark instances and as a controlled compari-son of coupling mechanisms under a common structure. The fourth transfer task, 

immuneClearance , differs: the clearance target restricts only the host. 25 A.1 algae: Carbon-uptake allocation in an algae community 

Biological interpretation. Microalgae in lakes and cultures take up inorganic car-bon either as dissolved CO 2, which diffuses passively but is scarce at high pH, or as bicarbonate, which requires active transport through carbon-concentrating mech-anisms. Species differ in their affinities for the two carbon forms, and cells can shift the allocation of their uptake machinery between them. When the carbon supply fluc-tuates, for example through a recurring feeding or mixing regime in a maintained culture, the community goes through cycles of bloom and decline in which the rela-tive availability of CO 2 and bicarbonate changes. We consider one full supply cycle of a maintained culture: biomasses and resources must return to their initial lev-els, and each strain maximizes its average gross production while avoiding extreme specialization. Zhou et al. (2022) study monocultures and pairwise competition among 

Scenedesmus quadricauda , Chlorella vulgaris , Synedra ulna and Phormidium sp. (a cyanobacterium), under different atmospheric CO 2 levels. Their model includes carbon uptake, quotas, carbonate chemistry and light. Proposed player i: one species, allocating uptake machinery between dissolved CO 2 and bicarbonate using ui. All species share the resource pools. This provides a community benchmark for either pairs or N = 4 players. The source has fixed uptake traits and does not solve a differential game. The controlled reduction and objectives below are our hypotheses. The four model affinity types in the source are abstract types; they must not be assigned to the four named species without calibration. Players A–D use the types HCHH, HCLH, LCHH, and LCLH. 

Literature and provenance. The source’s four abstract uptake types have the following numerical values: Type KC KH VC VH

HCHH 1 30 0.2 0.2 HCLH 1 1200 0.2 0.4 LCHH 40 30 0.4 0.2 LCLH 40 1200 0.4 0.4 For this dimensionless dynamic game, we use the same numerical contrasts, not inter-preting them as a calibrated conversion of source units. Rate units of the source are not needed for this dimensionless reduction. Its carbonate/quota model is richer than our reduction. Fitting the proposed ODE to named-species observations requires new parameter estimation and checking whether the reduced dynamics are adequate. 

Dimensions. N = 4 , nx = 6 , nODE = 10 , (nu,i )i∈P = (4 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (4 × 12) .

Categories. cellular , periodical , competition , variable-N .26 Fig. 4 Reference equilibrium candidate for algae . Interpretation. The carbon supply peaks in the first half of the cycle, so CO 2 and bicarbonate rise to maxima near t ≈ 20 (3.0 and 106 ) and fall to minima near t ≈ 48 –50 . The four strains respond with a delayed bloom: biomasses increase up to a factor of 2.65 (strain A) and peak between t ≈ 31 and t ≈ 37 , after which resource depletion and declining supply cause a synchronous decline back to the initial level. Strain D, with low affinities for both carbon forms, grows least and keeps a nearly balanced allocation. The allocation strategies differ according to the uptake traits: B, with low bicarbonate affinity, starts strongly CO 2-oriented and shifts toward bicarbonate while bicarbonate is abundant, whereas A and C increase their CO 2

allocation during and after the bloom, when bicarbonate becomes scarce; C reaches the strongest CO 2 preference ( 0.72 ) near t ≈ 39 . No additional path or budget restrictions are enabled, and the return conditions close all biomasses and resource pools within the tolerance. 

27 Game specification. Let Xi be biomass and C, H the CO 2 and bicarbonate carbon pools. Use consistent dimensionless units for this initial benchmark: 

qC,i = uiVC,i 

CKC,i + C , qH,i = (1 − ui)VH,i 

HKH,i + H , μi = Yi(qC,i + qH,i ).

˙Xi = ( μi − di)Xi, i ∈ P ,

˙C = λ(Cin (t) − C) − k+C + k−H − X

> i∈P

qC,i Xi,

˙H = λ(Hin (t) − H) + k+C − k−H − X

> i∈P

qH,i Xi.

This N + 2 state reduction omits cell quotas, variable pH and self-shading; k+, k −

approximate conversion at buffered conditions. Each uptake vanishes at depletion. Conversion cancels in ˙C + ˙H. Biomass loss leaves the modeled live-carbon pools. Let B0 > 0 be a fixed biomass scale. Player i minimizes 

Ji = −(w1 

> i

+ w3 

> i

) 1

T

Z T

> 0

μiXi

B0

dt + w2

> i

1

T

Z T

> 0

[u2 

> i

+ (1 − ui)2] d t. wi ≥ 0,

> 3

X

> k=1

wki = 1 .

The first term is the average gross biomass production. In the periodical setting the terminal biomass is fixed by the return band, so a terminal-biomass term would be nearly constant; its weight w3 

> i

is therefore added to the production weight. The quadratic term penalizes specialization of uptake investment; it is not an observed metabolic expenditure. Production benefits create incentives to deplete resources needed by competitors. 

Periodical setting. The inflow concentrations are modulated as Cin (t) = Cin [1 + 

a sin(2 πt/T per )] and Hin (t) = Hin [1 + a sin(2 πt/T per )] with forcing period Tper = T .The fixed initial state lies on a reference cycle obtained with constant allocations: phase-zero biomasses are fixed, and loss rates di and initial resource pools are cali-brated so that this reference cycle closes. Every player’s problem contains the return conditions |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ δ for all biomasses and resource pools. The tolerance 

δ = 10 −4 is absolute; since bicarbonate reaches H ≈ 106 and CO 2 about 3, the band is relatively much tighter for H than for the biomasses. Enabled bounds:              

> Owners Bound Location A, B, C, D |xj(T)−xj(0) | ≤ 0.0001 ,j= 1 , . . . , 6terminal (return)

Parameter instance. 

> types = [:HCHH, :HCLH, :LCHH, :LCLH] forcing_period = 60.0

28 T = 60.0 forcing_amplitude = 0.9 periodicity_tolerance = 0.0001 B0 = 1.0 K_C = [1.0, 1.0, 40.0, 40.0] K_H = [30.0, 1200.0, 30.0, 1200.0] V_C = [0.2, 0.2, 0.4, 0.4] V_H = [0.2, 0.4, 0.2, 0.4] Y = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] d = [0.1139088931, 0.06327295407, 0.06733780299, 0.01670186393] lambda = 0.2 k_plus = 0.3 k_minus = 0.01 C_in = 2.0 H_in = 60.0 x0 = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.046509686, 37.02538762] weights = [0.45 0.1 0.45; 0.45 0.1 0.45; 0.45 0.1 0.45; 0.45 0.1 0.45] initial = [0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.046509686, 37.02538762, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.2 antColonies: Competition for food, water, territory 

Biological interpretation. Neighboring ant colonies in arid habitats compete for food and water during the active season: workers leave the nest to forage, and colonies defend foraging areas against neighbors through territorial aggression, which reduces the rivals’ harvest but costs workers. Food brought home is stored and converted into brood, which later matures into new workers, so a colony’s allocation of its workforce has delayed consequences. We model one foraging season of three colonies that share food and water sources; each colony allocates its workers between food foraging, water collection, and aggression, subject to an effort budget and a minimum food store that must be maintained throughout the season. Players are N ≥ 2 colonies. Shared states F, W are available food and water; 

Ai, B i, C i are workers, brood, and stored food. x = ( F, W, (Ai)i∈P , (Bi)i∈P , (Ci)i∈P ).Each colony chooses nonnegative intensities (fi, w i, a i) for food foraging, water collection, and territorial activity. Define worker shares 

(sf i , s wi , s ai ) = (fi, w i, a i)1 + fi + wi + ai

.

The residual share performs nest tasks; total external allocation is below one. All controls depend on time alone. 

Literature and provenance. The source (Adler and Gordon 2003) models resource exploitation and interference between neighboring ant colonies. We retain these mech-anisms in an aggregate dynamic game, adding water limitation, brood maturation, and food stores as explicit proposed components. We do not reproduce the source spatial model or claim its fitted parameters. 29 Fig. 5 Reference equilibrium candidate for antColonies . Interpretation. The season opens with a territorial contest: during the first time unit all three colonies invest heavily in aggression (up to 0.57 )together with water collection, while food foraging is zero. Because conflict mortality of a colony decreases with its own aggression ( χQ i/(1 + sai Ai)), early aggression is partly defensive: each colony protects its workforce against the others’ aggression, a mutual arms race that ends once worker losses outweigh the protection. Aggression declines quickly and stops at t ≈ 0.9, after which food foraging starts abruptly and water collection continues. Food foraging then tapers off first, ending near t ≈ 4,and water collection declines more slowly until the end of the season; colony C, which weights effort costs most, forages least. Because nobody harvests food during the contest, the shared food source rises at the start, dips slightly while foraging is intense, and then accumulates again; water is drawn down to a minimum near t ≈ 4.2 and recovers once collection slows. Conflict and foraging risk reduce the worker forces by about 20% , brood declines from 0.3 to about 0.06 as it matures into workers faster than stored food and water produce new brood, and the food stores are run down to their protective floor at the end of the season ( g4–g6 active). Colony A also exhausts its effort budget ( g1

active), B nearly so, whereas C retains unused effort. 

30 Optimization and conflict among foraging ranges of neighboring colonies are ana-lyzed by Adler and Gordon (2003). A differential-game analysis of territorial space use, for wolf packs, is given by Hamelin and Lewis (2010). All numerical defaults are synthetic and dimensionless; no fitted biological values or source equilibrium results are asserted. (Da-Silva et al. 2012) reports water collection under experimental water stress. This supports treating water acquisition as a distinct colony task. (Greenwald et al. 2018) links food collection, internal storage, and redistribution. Our single food-store compartment aggregates these processes. Rao et al. (2020) provide a model linking nutrition, brood rearing, and colony dynamics. Our maturation and production terms are a simpler proposed representation. These components come from different species or model settings. Their combina-tion is a generic benchmark, not a species-specific reconstruction; worker castes and individual communication are not resolved. 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 11 , nODE = 17 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 3) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 2) .

Categories. population , seasonal , competition , variable-N .

Game specification. Rival territorial pressure is Qi = P 

> j∈P\{ i}

saj Aj . Food intake 

Hi, water collection Vi, and brood production Gi are 

Hi = αisf i AiF

(h + F )(1 + γQ i) , Vi = βiswi AiWh + W ,Gi = bA i

Ci

h + Ci

Vi

h + Vi

.h = half is the common normalized saturation scale; αi, β i are collection rates; γ is interference strength. Brood production requires both stored food and current water acquisition. 

˙F = IF − δF − X

> i∈P

Hi, ˙W = IW − δW − X

> i∈P

Vi.IF , I W : external supplies; δ: resource loss. 

˙Ai = ηB i −



dA + rf sf i + χQ i

1 + sai Ai



Ai,

˙Bi = Gi − (η + dB )Bi, ˙Ci = Hi − dC Ci − cB Gi.η: maturation; dA, d B , d C : worker, brood, and storage losses; rf : foraging risk; χ: con-flict mortality; cB : food cost per brood (parameter fields maturation, worker_loss, brood_loss, store_loss, foraging_risk, conflict, brood_cost ). Each loss flux vanishes when the corresponding stock is zero; Gi = 0 at Ci = 0 . Thus nonnegative states are invariant. Each player minimizes 

Ji = 1

T

Z T

> 03

X

> k=1

wki ℓik dt, wki ≥ 0, X

> k

wki = 1 .

31 There is no terminal objective. Each weight row is independently configurable. With 

Ei = f 2 

> i

+ w2 

> i

+ a2 

> i

,

(ℓi1, ℓ i2, ℓ i3) = ( −Bi, E i, −Ai).

The colony trades brood production, costly recruitment intensity, and worker reten-tion. Squared intensity is a behavioral cost proxy, not a literal worker count or a calibrated metabolic expenditure. 

˙Zi = Ei, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ budgets i. Food reserve path restriction: Ci(t) ≥

floors i. The default three-colony game has three recruitment budgets and three path reserve floors. Competition affects reserve feasibility. For q biological states, append N cost integrals then N budget integrals, all initially zero; the cost integrals include the factor 1/T , the ODE dimension is q + 2 N , and 

Ji = xq+ι(i)(T ).Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y15 (T ) ≤ 0.9 terminal B y16 (T ) ≤ 0.9 terminal C y17 (T ) ≤ 0.9 terminal A 0.1 ≤ y9(t) path B 0.1 ≤ y10 (t) path C 0.1 ≤ y11 (t) path 

Parameter instance. 

N = 3 T = 6.0 food_supply = 0.8 water_supply = 0.7 resource_loss = 0.15 food_rate = [0.9, 1.0, 1.1] water_rate = [0.8833333333, 0.8666666667, 0.85] half = 0.4 interference = 6.0 birth = 1.2 maturation = 0.6 brood_loss = 0.08 worker_loss = 0.12 foraging_risk = 0.08 conflict = 0.6 store_loss = 0.1 brood_cost = 0.8 x0 = [3.0, 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3] weights = [0.15 0.15 0.7; 0.15 0.2 0.65; 0.15 0.25 0.6] budgets = [0.9, 0.9, 0.9] floors = [0.1, 0.1, 0.1] initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [3.0, 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

32 A.3 avoidance: Avoidance and decentralized control 

Biological interpretation. In signaled active avoidance, an animal learns that a warning stimulus predicts an aversive event and that a timely action prevents it. The episode considered here is a single trial block: a warning cue is presented for the first half of the horizon and then withdrawn. Two decentralized control modules (for exam-ple, two motor or motivational subsystems) can each invest effort in avoidance actions. Acting builds the readiness to avoid, but it consumes a shared motivational resource that recovers only slowly, and each module also benefits from the other’s readiness. The instance is therefore an episodic game between partially aligned modules (partner benefit weight w4 

> i

) that must time their effort relative to the cue. The episode con-cerns the expression of a learned avoidance response within one trial block; learning across trials is not modeled. Dopaminergic signaling links warning stimuli, avoidance actions, and delayed rein-forcement in acoustically signaled avoidance learning Ilango et al. (2012). Work on biologically inspired adaptive control emphasizes decentralized modules whose actions change the state experienced by neighboring modules Schilling et al. (2019, 2020). Neither line of work formulates a dynamic game; the model below is a proposed continuous-time reduction. 

Literature and provenance. The avoidance and decentralized-controller studies (Ilango et al. 2012; Schilling et al. 2019, 2020) motivate the cue, readiness, and shared-resource mechanisms. The four-state ODE reduction, independent module objectives, control bounds, and all numerical coefficients are introduced for this benchmark. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 4 , nODE = 6 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 0) .

Categories. organismal , episodical , regulation .

Game specification. Let x = ( q, z A, z B , r ) denote the cue trace q, the readiness 

zA, z B of the two modules, and the shared motivational state r. Two decision modules choose avoidance intensities uA, u B :

˙q = aq (s − q) − bq (uA + uB )q, 

˙zi = az q(1 − zi) − dz zi + γu ir, i ∈ { A, B },

˙r = ar (r0 − r) − cr(uA + uB ) − hr(zA + zB ).

Here s(t) is the warning cue, an external signal with s(t) = 1 for 0 ≤ t ≤ 6 and s(t) = 0 

afterwards; the cue trace q follows it at rate aq and is depleted by the avoidance intensities of both modules. The shared state r represents a resource or motivational context; each module changes the context in which the other module acts. These equations are a tractable benchmark inspired by the cited mechanisms, not equations extracted from those publications. Each module minimizes a weighted cost over [0 , T ]:

Ji = w1 

> i

Ji1 + w2 

> i

Ji2 + w3 

> i

Ji3 + w4 

> i

Ji4,

33 Fig. 6 Reference equilibrium candidate for avoidance . Interpretation. While the warning cue is on (t < 6), the cue trace q rises quickly and saturates near 0.87 , driving the avoidance readiness of both modules upward. Module A opens with almost maximal avoidance intensity, lowers it to about 0.4

once readiness has built up, and then raises it again to above 0.9 right after the cue is withdrawn, while its readiness zA stays high during the unsignaled second half; it finally releases effort toward the end of the episode. Module B, which weights effort costs more strongly, mirrors this timing at a much lower level (below 0.12 ), so its readiness zB decays after cue offset and relies largely on the cue itself. The shared motivation r declines from its resting value during sustained avoidance and partially recovers when A reduces effort at the end. No state or budget restrictions are imposed; the contrast between the two modules follows solely from their different effort weights and from the delayed benefit of acting after the cue has vanished. 

34 Ji1 = − 1

T

Z T

> 0

zi(t) dt, Ji2 = 1

T

Z T

> 0

ui(t)2 dt, Ji3 = 1

T

Z T

> 0

Kr

Kr + r(t) dt, Ji4 = − 1

T

Z T

> 0

zj (t) dt, j̸ = i. 

The first term rewards readiness to avoid, the second penalizes control effort, the third penalizes an adverse motivational state, and the fourth represents an optional partner benefit. Weights satisfy wki ≥ 0 and P 

> k

wki = 1 .No state or budget bounds are enabled. 

Parameter instance. 

> T = 12.0 aq = 0.8 bq = 0.25 az = 0.9 dz = 0.35 gamma = 0.45 ar = 0.6 r0 = 1.0 cr = 0.12 hr = 0.08 Kr = 0.35 x0 = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0) initial = (0.2, 0.3) weights_A = (0.65, 0.15, 0.1, 0.1) weights_B = (0.25, 0.45, 0.1, 0.2) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0]

## A.4 batchFermentation: Division of labor in batch fermentation 

Biological interpretation. Industrial and natural fermentations often rely on a division of labor: an upstream strain converts the primary substrate into an inter-mediate that downstream specialists turn into the final product. In a closed batch, the substrate is finite, so the episode ends when a product target has been reached. Each strain pays for its production activity with a growth burden, and time is costly (for example, reactor occupancy or exposure to contaminants). The upstream strain chooses the batch duration, so only its time weight is strategically relevant (Section 2.4). The game instance asks how the strains schedule their production when the timing of the intermediate supply couples their incentives: three production controls trade batch time against production effort and state-dependent costs. 

Literature and provenance. A: upstream intermediate producer; B and C: product-synthesizing strains (Tsoi et al. 2018). A also schedules batch completion. 

x = ( XA, X B , X C , S, M, P ): strain biomasses, substrate, shared intermediate, and product. Motivates division of labor and production burden. The three-strain ODEs and numerical defaults here are a reduced synthetic game, not a reproduction of the source model. 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 6 , nODE = 12 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 3) .35 Fig. 7 Reference equilibrium candidate for batchFermentation . Interpretation. The batch ends at 

T ≈ 4.1, exactly when the product reaches its quota (the terminal equality g1 is active for all three strains). The upstream strain A first ramps up intermediate production from about 0.3 to its maximum, holds it during the middle of the batch, and switches it off as the substrate is exhausted near t ≈ 3.8. The producers B and C wait until intermediate is available (their product synthesis is zero for t < 0.9) and then increase synthesis in parallel, peaking around t ≈ 3 and easing off slightly at the end. Accordingly, the intermediate pool first accumulates, peaks near t ≈ 2.9, and is then drawn down, while the product rises sigmoidally. All biomasses grow while substrate lasts and level off afterwards. The effort budgets, the intermediate ceiling, and the producer floors remain slack, so the sequential relay is shaped by the shared quota, the time cost, and the substrate supply rather than by these limits. 

36 Categories. cellular , episodical , mutualism , freeTime .

Game specification. 

h = S/ (K + S), rA = pAuAXAh, ri = piuiXiM/ (K + M ) ( i ∈ { B, C }),

˙Xi = [ gi(1 − 0.5ui)h − d]Xi,

˙S = − X

> i∈P

gi(1 − 0.5ui)hX i/Y − rA,

˙M = rA − rB − rC − dM M, ˙P = rB + rC .g = growth , K = saturation , d = maintenance , p = production , Y =

yield , dM = intermediate_decay . The allocation burden coefficient is the fixed dimensionless number 0.5. 

Ji = w1 

> i

T + w2

> i

R T 

> 0

u2 

> i

dt + w3

> i

R T 

> 0

Li dt .

Li = M 2 − 0.1ι(i)Xi. The duration term penalizes batch length, effort penalizes synthesis allocation, and the third candidate trades intermediate burden against own biomass. It may be negative. 

P (0) = 0 , 0.8 − P (T ) ≥ 0 and P (T ) − 0.8 ≥ 0, shared by all players. Private effort budgets are (2 .5, 2, 1.5) . A imposes M ≤ 1.5 (accumulated intermediate inhibits the upstream strain), B imposes XB ≥ 0.2 and C imposes XC ≥ 0.15 (each producer retains a viable population for subsequent use of the culture) along the trajectory. Other terminal states are free. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A, B, C y6(T ) = 0 .8 terminal A y7(T ) ≤ 2.5 terminal B y8(T ) ≤ 2 terminal C y9(T ) ≤ 1.5 terminal A y5(t) ≤ 1.5 path B 0.2 ≤ y2(t) path C 0.15 ≤ y3(t) path 

Parameter instance. 

x0 = (0.4, 0.35, 0.3, 5.0, 0.1, 0.0) target = 0.8 growth = (0.7, 0.6, 0.5) saturation = 0.5 maintenance = 0.03 production = (0.8, 0.7, 0.6) yield = 0.7 intermediate_decay = 0.05 duration = 5.0 duration_bounds = (0.1, 20.0) initial = (0.5, 0.45, 0.4) weights = [0.75 0.15 0.1; 0.55 0.3 0.15; 0.45 0.25 0.3] budgets = (2.5, 2.0, 1.5) 

37 path_limits = (1.5, 0.2, 0.15) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.4, 0.35, 0.3, 5.0, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.5 biofilm: Matrix investment and dispersal in a biofilm 

Biological interpretation. Bacterial biofilms develop in episodes: cells attach, build an extracellular polymeric matrix (EPS) that protects them from loss, grow while substrate and oxygen diffuse in, and finally disperse to colonize new surfaces. EPS is costly to the producer and, in this model, protects only the producer’s own cells; neigh-bors are affected indirectly through crowding and shared resources (Xavier and Foster 2007). Dispersal converts attached biomass into offspring leaving the film. Strains shar-ing a surface therefore face a timing problem: invest early in protection and growth, then switch to dispersal before resources are exhausted. We model one colonization episode with three strains that differ in their preference for attached biomass versus dispersal output. Players are N ≥ 2 strains. Bi: attached biomass; Ei: strain-associated extra-cellular polymeric substances (EPS); S, O : shared substrate and oxygen. x =(( Bi)i∈P , (Ei)i∈P , S, O ). Each strain controls polymer allocation ei and dispersal intensity di, ordered (ei, d i)i∈P in player order. Dispersed biomass leaves this system; its departure is a reproductive-output proxy. All controls depend on time alone. 

Literature and provenance. The source studies competition between strains dif-fering in extracellular polymer production using spatial individual-based simulations (Xavier and Foster 2007). We extract resource allocation and matrix-mediated pro-tection as mechanisms for an aggregate ODE game, adding controlled dispersal and nutrient restrictions. The local protection law is our proposed reduction. All numerical defaults are synthetic and dimensionless; no fitted biological values or source equilibrium results are asserted. 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 8 , nODE = 14 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 2) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 3) .

Categories. cellular , episodical , competition , variable-N .

Game specification. 

Vi = vmax 

> i

Sh + SOh + O Bi,

˙Bi = (1 − ei)YB Vi −

 m

1 + σE i

+ di + κ X

> j∈P

Bj

 Bi, ˙Ei = YE eiVi − δE Ei,

˙S = D(Sin − S) − X

> i∈P

Vi, ˙O = D(Oin − O) − cO

X

> i∈P

Vi.vmax  

> i

, h, Y B , Y E , m, σ, κ, δ E map to vmax, half, biomass_yield, eps_yield, mortality, protection, crowding, eps_loss ; D = dilution and cO =

oxygen_cost . The same uptake flux is split between biomass and EPS production. No nutrient is consumed when S = 0 or O = 0 .38 Fig. 8 Reference equilibrium candidate for biofilm . Interpretation. All three strains invest in matrix production at the very beginning, consistent with protection acting longest when built early, and then taper this investment: A stops after t ≈ 4, while B and C keep a low level until t ≈ 8–9. Substrate and oxygen are drawn down from their inflow levels to minima near t ≈ 10 . Strain C, which values dispersal output most, builds the largest attached population (from 0.7 to about 2 at t ≈ 9.6) and the largest EPS pool; the small initial population of A declines throughout, and B stays nearly constant. In the final phase C switches to strong dispersal, reaching maximal intensity at the end, B follows with a smaller dispersal burst from t ≈ 11 , and A disperses only marginally. Dispersal removes much of C’s attached biomass, so substrate and oxygen recover late in the episode while the EPS pools decay. The effort budgets and the substrate and oxygen floors stay slack, although the substrate floor is approached closely around t ≈ 10 , exactly when dispersal begins. 

39 Each player minimizes 

Ji = 1

T

Z T

> 03

X

> k=1

wki ℓik dt, wki ≥ 0, X

> k

wki = 1 .

There is no terminal objective. Each weight row is independently configurable. 

(ℓi1, ℓ i2, ℓ i3) = ( −Bi, −diBi, e 2 

> i

+ d2 

> i

).

Candidates reward attached biomass and exported propagules, and penalize strategy effort. Weight changes allow persistence versus dispersal preferences. Export does not imply successful colonization elsewhere. 

˙Zi = e2 

> i

+ d2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ budgets i. Shared path floors S ≥ floors 1 and 

O ≥ floors 2 are enforced in every player’s deviation problem. The enabled restrictions are listed below. For q biological states, append N cost integrals then N budget integrals, all initially zero; the cost integrals include the factor 1/T , the ODE dimension is q + 2 N , and 

Ji = xq+ι(i)(T ).Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y12 (T ) ≤ 0.6 terminal B y13 (T ) ≤ 1 terminal C y14 (T ) ≤ 1.4 terminal A, B, C 0.5 ≤ y7(t) path A, B, C 0.4 ≤ y8(t) path 

Parameter instance. 

N = 3 T = 12.0 vmax = [1.0, 1.2, 1.4] half = 0.4 biomass_yield = 0.6 eps_yield = 1.5 mortality = 0.5 protection = 10.0 crowding = 0.08 eps_loss = 0.15 dilution = 0.5 substrate_in = 3.0 oxygen_in = 2.0 oxygen_cost = 0.5 x0 = [0.2, 0.45, 0.7, 0.01, 0.04, 0.08, 3.0, 2.0] weights = [0.5 0.4 0.1; 0.35 0.5 0.15; 0.2 0.6 0.2] budgets = [0.6, 1.0, 1.4] floors = [0.5, 0.4] initial = [0.2, 0.1, 0.2, 0.1, 0.2, 0.1] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.2, 0.45, 0.7, 0.01, 0.04, 0.08, 3.0, 2.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

40 A.6 ciliate: Bacterium–ciliate interaction 

Biological interpretation. Bacteria and bacterivorous ciliates form a classical predator–prey system in aquatic microbial food webs. Bacteria can express grazing defenses, for example filament formation, microcolonies, or surface modifications, at a cost in growth, whereas ciliates adjust their feeding activity at a cost in energy. Bac-terial productivity in lakes and ponds follows the seasonal cycle of temperature and nutrient supply. We model one full annual cycle that is assumed to repeat directly, after which both populations and both expressed phenotypes must return to their ini-tial values; the phenotypes follow the commanded defense and feeding levels with a delay. The physical state is x = ( x1, x 2, x 3, x 4): bacterial density, ciliate density, expressed defense, and expressed feeding activity. Player A commands defense uA and player B commands feeding uB .

Literature and provenance. Pseudomonas fluorescens and Tetrahymena ther-mophila motivate an interaction between two cellular organisms. Hiltunen and Becks (2014) demonstrate the importance of consumer co-evolution in this setting. Rapid evolution of prey defense can reshape consumer–resource cycles (Yoshida et al. 2007). The following saturating feeding model is a proposed coarse-grained game, rather than a fitted description of that experiment. A representative bacterial lineage invests in defense that reduces capture at a cost to growth. A representative ciliate lineage invests in feeding effort that increases food uptake at a metabolic cost. Resource limitation, saturation, and effort costs create different objectives for the two players. The numerical values are synthetic hypotheses. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 4 , nODE = 8 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 9) .

Categories. cellular , periodical , antagonism .

Game specification. With r(t) = r[1 + a sin(2 πt/T per )] , Tper = T , define the saturating feeding rate 

F (x1, x 3, x 4) = a0x4e−αx 3 x1

1 + ha 0x4e−αx 3 x1

.

The four-state dynamics are 

˙x1 = r(t)x1(1 − x1/K ) − cAx23x1 − F x 2,

˙x2 = ( eF − mB − cB x24)x2,

˙x3 = ( uA − x3)/τ A, ˙x4 = ( uB − x4)/τ B .

41 Fig. 9 Reference equilibrium candidate for ciliate . Interpretation. During the productive half of the cycle, bacterial density rises from 0.5 to about 0.9 and stays high until t ≈ 10 ; it then collapses to a minimum near 0.38 at t ≈ 18 when productivity is low, and recovers at the end of the cycle. The ciliate population responds weakly and with a delay, varying only between 0.33 and 0.39 and peaking during the bacterial decline. The bacteria invest in defense early, when their own density and the benefit of protection are high, and let the defense command decline gradually; once productivity drops, defense is switched off completely ( t ≈ 13 –19 ), consistent with the defense cost in the growth equation. The return condition then forces a short defense pulse at the end of the cycle that rebuilds the expressed defense to its initial level. The ciliate raises feeding effort to about 0.65 while prey are abundant and lowers it to about 0.45 during the bacterial trough. The expressed phenotypes follow their commands with visible delays, especially the slower bacterial defense. Both players exhaust their squared-effort budgets ( g1, g 2 active); the bacterial budget is almost used up by t ≈ 12 , and its remainder is spent on the return-induced final pulse. 

42 The players minimize the cycle-average costs 

JA = 1

T

Z T

> 0



−w1

> A

x1

x1,0

− w2

> A

r(t)x1 + w3

> A

u2

> A



dt, JB = 1

T

Z T

> 0



−w1

> B

x2

x2,0

− w2 

> B

eF x 2 + w3 

> B

u2

> B



dt. 

The first features reward mean relative abundance; the second reward gross production proxies. In the listed instance all feature scales equal one; otherwise each weight is divided by its positive scales_A or scales_B entry. Command effort remains distinct from expressed phenotype costs in the dynamics. For A, R T 

> 0

u2 

> A

dt ≤ UA; for B, R T 

> 0

u2 

> B

dt ≤ UB . Optional density floors x1 ≥ εA and 

x2 ≥ εB are assigned to A and B respectively and are disabled here. Both players impose |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ δ, j = 1 , . . . , 4, with δ = 10 −2 in physical coordinates. Initial densities come from a constant-command reference cycle, and initial phenotypes equal these commands. Numerical coordinates are y = (log x1, log x2, x 3, x 4, z A, z B , b A, b B ); zi accumu-lates the unaveraged running cost and ˙bi = u2 

> i

. Quadratures start at zero. For the density components, return bounds become log( xj (0) − δ) ≤ yj (T ) ≤ log( xj (0) + δ),rather than symmetric bands in log coordinates. The optional phenotype=false vari-ant substitutes commands directly for expressed traits and removes their relaxation equations. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y7(T ) ≤ 2 terminal B y8(T ) ≤ 6 terminal A, B |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 0.01 , j = 1 , . . . , 4 terminal (return) 

Parameter instance. 

forcing_period = 20.0 T = 20.0 forcing_amplitude = 0.8 periodicity_tolerance = 0.01 r = 1.0 K = 1.0 c_A = 0.15 a0 = 2.0 alpha = 2.0 h = 0.5 e = 0.5 m_B = 0.15 c_B = 0.1 x0 = (0.5055436644, 0.3564873025) w_A = (0.9, 0.08, 0.02) w_B = (0.4, 0.5, 0.1) scales_A = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) scales_B = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) U_A = 2.0 

43 U_B = 6.0 epsilon_A = nothing epsilon_B = nothing initial = (0.2, 0.5) phenotype = true tau_A = 0.75 tau_B = 0.25 phenotype0 = (0.2, 0.5) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [-0.6821208656, -1.031456657, 0.2, 0.5, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.7 circadianCycle: PER/TIM circadian oscillator 

Biological interpretation. Circadian clocks are intrinsic biochemical oscillators whose period is close to, but not fixed at, 24 hours. In Drosophila , PER and TIM proteins are synthesized, phosphorylated, combine into a complex, enter the nucleus, and repress their own transcription, closing a delayed negative feedback loop. Light acts on this loop by accelerating TIM degradation, which is how the clock is reset by the environment. We model one full cycle of the loop as a periodical game between two regulatory influences: player A modulates per transcription and sets the cycle length, while player B, the light-input pathway (e.g., CRY-mediated TIM degradation) modeled as a regulatory module, controls TIM degradation. Both prefer balanced PER/TIM levels and low intervention effort. The duration cost represents a preference for a faster cycle within the admissible range; it is a synthetic device to create a nontrivial duration decision, not a biological fitness argument. Only A’s duration weight is strategically relevant (Section 2.4). We use the ten-state PER/TIM model of Leloup and Goldbeter (Leloup and Gold-beter 1998) in the form given by Slaby et al. (2007), Appendix B, with its kinetic defaults (nM, hours). 

x = ( MP , P 0, P 1, P 2, M T , T 0, T 1, T 2, C, C N ).MP , M T : per/tim mRNA; Pj , T j : PER/TIM with j phosphorylation steps; C, C N :cytosolic/nuclear complex. Nuclear complex represses transcription. A controls per transcription and duration. B controls TIM degradation, the light-dependent intervention mechanism studied in the source. The two-player game, centered control mapping, objectives, and restrictions are new benchmark choices; they are not experimental parameter estimates. 

Literature and provenance. The ten concentration equations of Leloup and Gold-beter (1998) and the kinetic coefficients come from Appendix B of Slaby et al. (2007), with the notation correction stated below. Centered transcription and degradation controls, their separate objectives, player A’s duration ownership, effort budgets, con-centration ceilings, and approximate return conditions define the added game. The initial phase is constructed numerically from the source oscillator. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 10 , nODE = 14 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 22) .

Categories. molecular , periodical , regulation , freeTime .44 Fig. 10 Reference equilibrium candidate for circadianCycle . Interpretation. Player A chooses a cycle length of about 24 .04 hours, slightly shorter than the uncontrolled reference period of 24 .13 

hours. During the first half of the cycle, when the nuclear complex CN is high and represses transcrip-tion, both mRNAs and all PER and TIM forms fall to low values; A keeps transcriptional intervention off and B quickly lowers TIM degradation after an initial pulse. As repression wanes (with CN reach-ing its minimum near t ≈ 16 ), A raises per transcription to a maximum near t ≈ 13 , followed with a delay of a few hours by B’s increase in TIM degradation, which keeps TIM from overshooting PER. The mRNAs peak around t ≈ 19 , the phosphorylated proteins and the cytosolic complex around 

t ≈ 20 –22 , and the nuclear complex rebuilds to its initial level at the end of the cycle, closing the loop within the return tolerance. The squared-effort budgets and the concentration ceilings remain slack; the interventions are shaped by the phase structure of the feedback loop. 

45 Game specification. For X ∈ { P, T }, define 

r1X = V1X

X0

K1X + X0

, r2X = V2X

X1

K2X + X1

,r3X = V3X

X1

K3X + X1

, r4X = V4X

X2

K4X + X2

, Γ = k3P2T2 − k4C. 

˙MX = evsX 

KnIX 

KnIX + CnN

− vmX 

MX

KmX + MX

− kdMX ,

˙X0 = ksX MX − r1X + r2X − kdX0,

˙X1 = r1X − r2X − r3X + r4X − kdX1.

˙X2 = r3X − r4X − Γ − evdX 

X2

KdX + X2

− kdX2,

˙C = Γ − k1C + k2CN − kdC C, 

˙CN = k1C − k2CN − kdN CN .

evsP = vsP [1 + 0 .6( uA − 0.5)] , evsT = vsT ,

evdP = vdP , evdT = vdT + 2( uB − 0.5) .

At (0 .5, 0.5) , the source’s Appendix B dynamics are recovered. Γ is the net complex-formation flux. On normalized time, multiply every physical derivative by the constant duration T . The printed K1C in the source complex equation is interpreted as k1C,consistent with its nuclear equation, Figure 3, and Table B1. 

Ji = w1 

> i

T + w2

> i

Z T

> 0

u2 

> i

dt + w3

> i

Z T

> 0

Li dt, LA = ( MP − MT )2, LB = ( P0 + P1 + P2 − T0 − T1 − T2)2.

These candidates penalize elapsed time, effort, and transcription/protein imbalance. All ten concentrations satisfy |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 10 −4 nM; 12 ≤ T ≤ 36 hours excludes zero-time closure. Initial state is a fixed nonstationary reference-cycle point. A has effort budget 12 and MP ≤ 5; B has budget 10 and T2 ≤ 4. This is an approximate cycle; zero return tolerance requests exact closure. Cost quadratures are not periodic. These bounds do not prove exclusion of every possible controlled multi-winding orbit. Integrate Appendix B with controls (0 .5, 0.5) from (1 , . 3, . 5, . 5, 1, . 3, . 5, . 5, . 5, . 5) to 1500 hours (Tsit5, absolute/relative tolerances 10 −12 /10 −11 ). Find late maxima of CN

from k1C − (k2 + kdN )CN = 0 .The stored reference period is 24 .1346 hours; successive reference states differed by less than 6 · 10 −13 in that construction. This is an uncontrolled periodic initializer, not an optimized game result. Paired kinetic tuples below are ordered PER, TIM. The four V and K entries are shared by both phosphorylation chains, as in Table B1. Initial concentrations, unlike duration and controls, are fixed during optimization. Enabled bounds: 46 Owners Bound Location A y11 (T ) ≤ 12 terminal B y12 (T ) ≤ 10 terminal A y1(t) ≤ 5 path B y8(t) ≤ 4 path A, B |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 0.0001 , j = 1 , . . . , 10 terminal (return) 

Parameter instance. 

x0 = (0.4884645232, 0.1972717656, 0.2725715265, 0.4025780857, 0.4884645232, 0.1972717656, 0.2725715265, 0.4025780857, 0.7156565511, 2.044733003) vs = (1.0, 1.0) vm = (0.7, 0.7) Km = (0.2, 0.2) ks = (0.9, 0.9) vd = (2.0, 2.0) KI = (1.0, 1.0) Kd = (0.2, 0.2) V = (8.0, 1.0, 8.0, 1.0) K = (2.0, 2.0, 2.0, 2.0) k1 = 0.6 k2 = 0.2 k3 = 1.2 k4 = 0.6 kd = 0.01 kdC = 0.01 kdN = 0.01 hill = 4 transcription_gain = 0.6 light_gain = 2.0 duration = 24.13458674 duration_bounds = (12.0, 36.0) periodicity_tolerance = 0.0001 initial = (0.5, 0.5) weights = [0.65 0.2 0.15; 0.45 0.35 0.2] budgets = (12.0, 10.0) path_limits = (5.0, 4.0) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.4884645232, 0.1972717656, 0.2725715265, 0.4025780857, 0.4884645232, 0.1972717656, 0.2725715265, 0.4025780857, 0.7156565511, 2.044733003, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.8 fishery: Competing fleets harvest a renewable stock 

Biological interpretation. Many fisheries are managed by rotation: a fishing ground is opened, fished down, and then closed until the stock has recovered, after which the cycle repeats (pulse or rotational harvesting). The length of such a rotation is a management decision with a clear biological trade-off. Short rotations allow a per-opening catch allowance to be taken more often, but the logistic stock needs time to rebuild between openings, and a deeply depleted stock is costly to fish because catch per unit effort falls with biomass. We therefore model one recurring rotation, which is periodic in the stock but not in the catch accounts. 47 Dockner et al. (1989): a Gordon–Schaefer duopoly, with Nash and Stackelberg solutions; an established fishery differential game. Suri (2008), p. 168: explicit finite-horizon two-harvester dynamics and separate profit objectives with linear–quadratic effort costs; we retain its stock and cost structure. Players are fishing fleets, and the biological state is a renewable fish stock. In rotational management the opening schedule is set by the licence holder or the man-agement authority; here it is assigned to fleet A, which also chooses the rotation length. Fleet B fishes the same ground within each opening. The rotation structure, per-opening quotas, finite effort limits, and numerical parameter values below define a synthetic benchmark, not a calibrated fishery. 

Literature and provenance. The stock balance and linear–quadratic fleet costs follow the finite-horizon harvesting formulation in Suri (2008); Dockner et al. (1989) provides differential-game context. The duration owner, approximate stock return, catch quotas, finite effort limits, and normalized numerical instance are benchmark additions. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 1 , nODE = 5 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 4) .

Categories. population , periodical , competition , freeTime .

Game specification. x: fish biomass; ui: fleet i’s fishing effort, i ∈ { A, B }. Fleet A additionally chooses the rotation duration T ∈ [Tmin , T max ]. The dynamics are written on normalized time s ∈ [0 , 1] , with physical time t = T s ; the core performs no hidden time scaling. Catch rate is hi = qiuix, where qi is catchability, and 

dx ds = T [rx (1 − x/K ) − qAuAx − qB uB x] , x(0) = x0.r is intrinsic growth; K is carrying capacity. There is no external clock: the default 

x0 = K 1−(qA ¯uA +qB ¯uB )/r  is the stock that is stationary under the reference efforts 

¯ui, so the reference policy returns for every duration. Biomass and effort units are normalized; time, price, and cost coefficients use a consistent arbitrary unit system. Each fleet minimizes its average net cost rate over one rotation, 

Ji =

Z 10

h

−w1 

> i

piqiuix + w2

> i



aiui + bi

2 u2

> i

i 

ds = 1

T

Z T

> 0

h

. . . 

i

dt, 

with wki ≥ 0 and w1 

> i

+ w2 

> i

= 1 ; pi is fish price and ai, b i are linear and quadratic effort costs. Per-rotation catch accounts 

dH i

ds = T q iuix, Hi(0) = 0 , Hi(1) ≤ Qi, x(s) ≥ xmin ,

make short rotations attractive (more quota per unit time) but require a depletion– recovery cycle within each rotation. Each quota is enforced for its fleet; the stock floor and the return condition |x(1) − x0| ≤ δ are enforced in both players’ deviation problems. 48 Fig. 11 Reference equilibrium candidate for fishery . Interpretation. Fleet A chooses a rotation of length T ≈ 5.4. Both fleets fish hardest when the ground opens: A starts at full effort and B at about half effort, and both reduce effort as the stock is fished down, consistent with catch per unit effort falling with biomass. Biomass therefore drops steeply from its stationary reference level of about 0.78 

to a minimum near 0.49 roughly one third into the rotation. B stops fishing first, and A exhausts its per-rotation catch quota ( g1 active) and closes the ground well before the end of the rotation. The final closed phase lets the logistic stock recover to its initial level, which the return condition requires, while B’s quota and the shared stock floor remain slack. The chosen duration is consistent with a balance of two effects: a shorter rotation would let A take its quota more often, but the stock could not recover within the rotation without a much deeper and more costly depletion. 

49 Julia uses the augmented order (x, z A, z B , H A, H B ), where zi accumulates the inte-grand of Ji, zi(0) = 0 , and Ji = zi(1) ; these four accumulators are quadratures, not biological states. The duration is the scalar parameter owned by player A. Enabled bounds:                            

> Owners Bound Location Ay4(T)≤0.8terminal By5(T)≤0.4terminal A, B 0.4≤y1(t)path A, B |xj(T)−xj(0) | ≤ 0.0001 ,j= 1 , . . . , 1terminal (return)

Parameter instance. 

> periodicity_tolerance = 0.0001 r = 0.8 K = 1.0 q = (0.7, 0.55) price = (1.2, 1.0) linear_cost = (0.06, 0.08) quadratic_cost = (0.5, 0.65) w_A = (0.8, 0.2) w_B = (0.6, 0.4) umax = (1.0, 1.0) initial = (0.2, 0.07) x0 = 0.776875 duration = 6.0 duration_bounds = (1.0, 12.0) quotas = (0.8, 0.4) floor = 0.4 control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.776875, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]

## A.9 foraging: Competitive foraging 

Biological interpretation. Animals foraging on a shared, renewable food patch, for example a group of birds on a fruiting tree or grazers on a pasture, convert food into energy reserves and part of it into a retained harvest (such as caches or brood provisions). Intense foraging depletes the patch for everyone. A management rule keeps the patch above 70% of carrying capacity; with logistic regrowth this is a conservative rule, not a collapse threshold. We model one foraging episode of three foragers that differ in how they value their retained harvest relative to their foraging effort. Each player controls foraging effort subject to an effort budget. 

Literature and provenance. Competitive foraging of mallards on two food patches was compared with the ideal free distribution (Harper 1982). This supports com-petition for a shared renewable food supply, not the specific depletion and reserve dynamics. We extend the resource competition idea to three foragers with finite effort budgets; the particular state equations and budgets are synthetic. All rates, budgets, weights, and initial values below are synthetic, dimensionless benchmark choices, not fitted values from this source. 50 Fig. 12 Reference equilibrium candidate for foraging . Interpretation. All foragers start at maximal effort and draw the shared food stock down from 8 to its conservation floor of 7 within about half a time unit; from then on the floor is active for the rest of the episode ( g2), so the foragers share the patch’s regrowth. Their schedules then diverge. Forager A, which weights effort most, forages at about 0.68 early and reduces effort to about 0.27 near t ≈ 8 before a small final increase; B keeps an intermediate effort around 0.5–0.58 ; and C, which values retained harvest most, starts low ( 0.33 ) and increases its effort to about 0.67 toward the end. Because the floor fixes the total harvest rate, one forager’s higher effort lowers the others’ intake: C’s late increase coincides with A’s decline. Energy reserves reflect these schedules: A’s reserve peaks at about 9.5 near t ≈ 5.5 and then declines, B’s levels off near 8, and C’s keeps rising to about 9.1. Retained harvest accumulates earliest for A, which has the highest foraging and retention efficiencies, and reaches the largest total ( 13 .7), whereas C’s harvest accelerates late. None of the effort budgets is exhausted (used 3.0 of 3.5, 2.9 of 4, and 3.1 of 

4.5); the shared floor, not individual effort limits, restrains the harvest. 

51 Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 7 , nODE = 13 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 2) .

Categories. population , episodical , competition , variable-N .

Game specification. S: food; Ei: reserve; Hi: retained harvest (subject to loss). Hi

is a proxy fed by the reserves without depleting them. ui: foraging effort. Players are individual foragers; N = 3 by default. 

˙S = rS (1 − S/K ) − S X

> j∈P

cj uj ,

˙Ei = eiuiS − dE Ei, ˙Hi = hiuiEi − dH Hi.

Controls are open-loop functions of time. Initial-state order: x = ( S, (Ei)i∈P , (Hi)i∈P );values appear below. Each player i ∈ P minimizes Ji = T −1 R T 

> 0

ℓi dt , with 

ℓi = −w1 

> i

Hi + w2 

> i

u2 

> i

.wki ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 ; weights are independently configurable. 

˙Zi = u2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ B i.

Budgets are private to each player. The enabled path floor is S ≥ 7. No forager values the patch level itself: depletion results from competition for the shared regrowth, and the management floor restrains it. When enabled, it is enforced in every player’s deviation problem. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y11 (T ) ≤ 3.5 terminal A, B, C 7 ≤ y1(t) path B y12 (T ) ≤ 4 terminal C y13 (T ) ≤ 4.5 terminal 

Parameter instance. 

N = 3 T = 10.0 r = 0.8 K = 10.0 c = [0.12, 0.16, 0.2] e = [0.8, 0.7272727273, 0.6666666667] h = [0.6, 0.5454545455, 0.5] de = 0.3 dh = 0.1 x0 = [8.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] w_A = (0.3333333333, 0.6666666667) w_B = (0.375, 0.625) w_C = (0.8, 0.2) budgets = [3.5, 4.0, 4.5] 

52 floor = 7.0 initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [8.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.10 immuneClearance: Immune clearance and viral immune evasion 

Biological interpretation. An acute viral infection is a contest between the host immune response and the virus. Cytotoxic T cells kill infected cells and antibodies neutralize free virus; both responses are costly, and cytotoxic killing damages the infected tissue itself (immunopathology). Many viruses counter these responses, for example by reducing antigen presentation on infected cells or by masking epitopes, at a cost in replication. We model one infection episode as a game between the host (A), which activates cytotoxic and antibody responses and ends the episode when the viral load has been reduced to a prescribed low level, and the virus (B), which invests in immune evasion to maximize its accumulated viral load, a proxy for transmission opportunity. Treating the viral population as a player summarizes selection on viral gene expression within one infection; it is not a claim of viral foresight. The host owns the episode duration, since clearance ends it. 

Literature and provenance. The target-cell infection and viral production/clear-ance kinetics follow the model of influenza A infection kinetics in humans (Baccam et al. 2006). Saturating infection, the immune compartments, the damage law, the evasion mechanism, the host–virus game, and all coefficients are synthetic; this is not the fitted influenza model or a treatment recommendation. 

x = ( H, I, V, E, Ab, Z ): susceptible cells, infected cells, virus, cytotoxic effectors, antibody activity, and tissue damage. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 6 , nODE = 10 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 , 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (4 , 1) .

Categories. cellular , episodical , antagonism , freeTime .

Game specification. Host A controls cytotoxic activation uA1 and antibody activa-tion uA2; virus B controls immune evasion uB . With susceptible cells H, infected cells 

I, viral load V , cytotoxic effectors E, antibody activity Ab , and tissue damage Z,

b = βHV / (1 + V ), ˙H = −b, 

˙I = b − [dI + kE (1 − σu B )E]I, 

˙V = p(1 − κu B )I − [c + (1 − σu B )Ab ]V, 

˙E = a1uA1V / (1 + V ) − d1E, ˙Ab = a2uA2V / (1 + V ) − d2Ab, 

˙Z = h1E2 + h2I − rZ Z. 

Evasion reduces cytotoxic killing and antibody neutralization by the fraction σu B and costs the fraction κu B of virion production. 53 Fig. 13 Reference equilibrium candidate for immuneClearance . Interpretation. The host ends the episode at T ≈ 2.93 , when the viral load has fallen from 2 to the prescribed target 0.2 (the host’s terminal equality g1 is active). The host relies mainly on antibodies: antibody activation starts at 

0.90 and declines almost linearly to zero, whereas cytotoxic activation stays below 0.17 and declines in parallel. A mechanism consistent with this split is that cytotoxic killing also causes tissue damage, which the host penalizes. The virus invests in evasion early, rising from 0.10 to a maximum of 0.13 

near t ≈ 0.35 , and then reduces it to zero as the viral load falls, well before antibody activity peaks; the virus uses less than 2% of its evasion budget. Antibody activity rises from 0.1 to a maximum of about 0.26 near t ≈ 1.2 and then decays slowly, cytotoxic effectors stay near 0.05 –0.11 , infected cells decline from 0.2 to about 0.11 , and about a quarter of the susceptible cells become infected. Tissue damage accumulates to about 0.05 . The host’s activation budget, the evasion budget, the susceptible-cell floor, and the damage ceiling remain slack, so the schedules are shaped by the host’s time and burden costs and by the virus’s trade-off between evasion and production. 

54 β = beta , dI = infected_decay , kE = killing , p = production , c = clearance ,

a = activation , d = effector_decay , h = damage , rZ = recovery , σ = evasion ,

κ = evasion_cost .The players minimize 

JA = w1

> A

T + w2

> A

Z T

> 0

(u2 

> A1

+ u2

> A2

) d t + w3

> A

Z T

> 0

(V 2 + Z2) d t, JB = −w1

> B

Z T

> 0

V dt + w2

> B

Z T

> 0

u2 

> B

dt. 

The host trades a short infection against activation effort and against viral and patho-logical burden; the virus trades accumulated viral load against the replication cost of evasion. 

V (0) = 2 and the clearance target V (T ) = 0 .2 are restrictions of the host only; the virus is not bound by them, so its deviations can make the host’s target harder to reach. The host’s squared activation budget is 2, and it imposes H ≥ 0.5 (a minimum of intact target tissue) and Z ≤ 0.8 (a tolerable level of immunopathology) along the trajectory. The virus has a squared evasion budget of 1. Other terminal states are free. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y3(T ) = 0 .2 terminal A y7(T ) ≤ 2 terminal B y8(T ) ≤ 1 terminal A 0.5 ≤ y1(t) path A y6(t) ≤ 0.8 path 

Parameter instance. 

x0 = (1.0, 0.2, 2.0, 0.1, 0.1, 0.0) target = 0.2 beta = 0.25 infected_decay = 0.6 production = 0.7 clearance = 0.8 killing = 0.6 activation = (0.8, 0.6) effector_decay = (0.5, 0.35) damage = (0.2, 0.15) recovery = 0.4 evasion = 0.8 evasion_cost = 0.3 duration = 5.0 duration_bounds = (0.1, 20.0) initial = (0.5, 0.45, 0.3) w_A = (0.5, 0.3, 0.2) w_B = (0.6, 0.4) budgets = (2.0, 1.0) path_limits = (0.5, 0.8) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] 

55 numerical_x0 = [1.0, 0.2, 2.0, 0.1, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.11 metabolicPathway: Enzyme allocation under budgets 

Biological interpretation. Many metabolic pathways branch: a shared substrate is converted by parallel enzymes whose products feed a common downstream pool. When the enzymes are expressed by different cells or regulatory modules, each module pays for its own enzyme synthesis while all benefit from the shared product, a classic public-good situation. Here the substrate is supplied with a recurring (for example, feeding-related) oscillation, and we consider one full supply cycle after which all pools return to their initial values. Each reaction also yields a module-specific byproduct that accumulates and inhibits the module’s own reaction (product inhibition), so enzyme investment must be timed relative to the substrate supply and to the module’s byproduct load. Because both modules value the same product, the game is a public-goods game in which free-riding on the other module’s expression is expected. 

Literature and provenance. Limited enzyme-production capacity is an established optimal-control modeling assumption (Klipp et al. 2002; Oyarzún et al. 2008; Oyarzún et al. 2009). We extend it to two competing expression modules with private budgets and unequal product/effort weights; the noncooperative split is a proposed bench-mark. All rates, budgets, weights, and initial values below are synthetic, dimensionless benchmark choices, not fitted values from this source. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 6 , nODE = 10 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 13) .

Categories. molecular , periodical , regulation .

Game specification. Xi: byproduct pools; S: substrate; Y : product; Ei: active enzyme. ui: enzyme-expression effort. vi denotes productive flux. 

vi = ViEiS

(Ki + S)(1 + Xi/K X,i ) , ˙Xi = vi − diXi,

˙S = D(Sin − S) − X

> j∈P

vj , ˙Y = X

> j∈P

vj − dY Y, 

˙Ei = αiui − βiEi.

Each reaction yields one unit of product and one unit of a module-specific byprod-uct Xi, which inhibits its own reaction with inhibition constant KX,i (KX ) and is removed at rate di. Controls are open-loop functions of time. Initial-state order: 

x = ( XA, X B , S, Y, E A, E B ); values appear below. Each player i ∈ P minimizes Ji = T −1 R T 

> 0

ℓi dt , with 

ℓi = −w1 

> i

Y + w2 

> i

u2 

> i

.wki ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 ; weights are independently configurable. 

˙Zi = u2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ B i.

56 Fig. 14 Reference equilibrium candidate for metabolicPathway . Interpretation. Over one supply period ( T = 12 ), substrate rises from 1.0 to a maximum of 3.3 near t ≈ 5 and falls to a minimum of 

0.73 near t ≈ 10 .8. Module A, which values the shared product most, expresses at the upper bound at the start, while its enzyme pool is low and substrate is rising, builds its enzyme to 1.1 by t ≈ 1.5,and then switches expression off completely between t ≈ 2.4 and t ≈ 7, during the substrate peak. During this phase its byproduct has accumulated to its maximum ( 2.15 near t ≈ 3.8) and inhibits its reaction. A second, weaker expression phase (up to 0.43 ) follows while substrate declines. Module B expresses smoothly, from 0.43 at the start down to 0.24 near the substrate peak and up to 0.36 

near t ≈ 10 , so its enzyme pool varies only between 0.78 and 0.94 . B’s expression exceeds A’s during most of the cycle, so B does not free-ride on A’s product. The shared product follows the substrate with a lag and peaks at 2.16 near t ≈ 3.9. Both squared-effort budgets remain slack. Byproduct A, the product, and enzyme B end at the edge of their return bands ( |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≈ 10 −2), so the return condition, rather than a budget, restricts the end of the cycle. 

57 Budgets are private to each player. The optional path floor is S ≥ floor . When enabled, it is enforced in every player’s deviation problem. 

Periodical setting. The substrate supply is modulated as Sin (t) = Sin [1 + 

a sin(2 πt/T per )] with forcing period Tper = T . The fixed initial state lies on the ref-erence cycle obtained with constant expression efforts, and every player’s problem contains the return conditions |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ δ for all six pools. Enabled bounds:                        

> Owners Bound Location Ay9(T)≤3.6terminal By10 (T)≤3terminal A, B |xj(T)−xj(0) | ≤ 0.01 ,j= 1 , . . . , 6terminal (return)

Parameter instance. 

> initial = (0.2, 0.3) forcing_period = 12.0 T = 12.0 forcing_amplitude = 0.8 periodicity_tolerance = 0.01 V = (1.2, 1.0) K = (0.4, 0.6) KX = (1.0, 1.0) d = (0.1, 0.08) D = 0.4 Sin = 3.0 dp = 0.2 al = (0.8, 0.7) be = (0.3, 0.25) x0 = (1.773752359, 2.261203403, 1.032172585, 1.721238584, 0.5333333333, 0.84) w_A = (0.9, 0.1) w_B = (0.7, 0.3) budgets = (3.6, 3.0) floor = nothing control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [1.773752359, 2.261203403, 1.032172585, 1.721238584, 0.5333333333, 0.84, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]

## A.12 microbial: Microbial cross-feeding 

Biological interpretation. Many microbial communities are held together by cross-feeding: strains that cannot synthesize an essential metabolite (for example, an amino acid) obtain it from partners that secrete it, while all strains compete for a com-mon carbon source. Secretion is costly for the producer but benefits its partner, and thereby indirectly the producer itself, because the partner supplies the producer’s own requirement. In a chemostat with a recurring feed with a period of 80 h (for exam-ple, a feed-and-starve regime of a maintained culture), substrate availability oscillates. We model one full feed cycle of a maintained community of ten strains organized in reciprocal pairs; every strain and every pool must return to its initial value, and each strain chooses its secretion allocation over the cycle. 58 We extend the two-strain game of Banga and Villaverde (2026) to N ≥ 2 strains, each producing one metabolite and choosing one allocation ui. The state has 2N + 1 

entries: 

x = (( Xi)i∈P , S, (Mi)i∈P ).

Let aij ∈ { 0, 1} indicate that strain i requires metabolite Mj , with aii = 0 and 

di = P 

> j∈P

aij ≥ 1.Edges describe essential nutrients; multiple incoming nutrients are complementary, not interchangeable. Each metabolite is a shared extracellular pool. Its consumers compete through depletion, while all strains compete for S. This graph-based exten-sion and the following N = 10 setting are proposals; the source treats only two strains. 

Literature and provenance. The two-strain starting formulation is taken from Banga and Villaverde (2026). The network extension, its ten-strain instance, and partner-averaged objective candidates are benchmark additions. 

Dimensions. N = 10 , nx = 21 , nODE = 61 , (nu,i )i∈P = (10 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P =(10 × 42) .

Categories. cellular , periodical , mutualism , variable-N .

Game specification. 

μi = μi, max (1 − ciui) SKS,i + S

Y 

> j∈P :aij =1

Mj

KM,ij + Mj

.

˙Xi = ( μi − D)Xi, i ∈ P ,

˙S = D(Sin − S) − X

> i∈P

μiXi

YS,i 

,

˙Mj = αj uj Xj − DM j − X 

> i∈P :aij =1

μiXi

YM,ij 

, j ∈ P .YM,ij > 0 is the yield of consumer i on metabolite j. All consumers of a depleted Mj

have zero growth, preserving nonnegativity. 

Reduction check: N = 2 , aAB = aBA = 1 , KM,ij = KM,i and YM,ij = YM,i 

recover all five source equations. With ⟨z⟩ = T −1 R T 

> 0

z dt, the objectives are 

Ji1 = −⟨ Xi/B 0⟩, Ji2 = ⟨u2 

> i

+ ϵM M 2 

> i

⟩,Ji3 =

*

1

di

X 

> j∈P :aij =1

Kdef 

Kdef + Mj

+

, Ji4 = −

*

1

di

X 

> j∈P :aij =1

Xj /B 0

+

.

Player i minimizes Ji = P4 

> k=1

wki Jik , wi ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 . Partner terms are averaged to avoid a purely degree-induced increase in scale. No terminal cost; the only state restrictions are the return conditions below. Feature scales: B0 = 2 , Kdef = 0 .35 ,

ϵM = 10 −5. The term ϵM M 2 

> i

is a small regularization that penalizes accumulation of the own secreted metabolite. 59 Fig. 15 Reference equilibrium candidate for microbial . Interpretation. The substrate (plotted scaled by 0.1) rises from 2.7 to about 10 at t ≈ 28 during the high-feed half of the cycle and falls to about 1

near t ≈ 67 . The strains grow with a delay and roughly double their densities by t ≈ 50 , then decline back to their initial values; the metabolite pools vary more weakly and in a strain-specific way (only the pools MA–ME are drawn, since the plot shows at most 16 states). All strains secrete strongly at the beginning of the cycle, when their partners are still at low density and need the exchanged metabolites to exploit the rising substrate, and reduce secretion as growth becomes substrate-limited. In the low-feed phase between t ≈ 30 and t ≈ 60 several strains cut secretion markedly (A down to 

0.18 , C to 0.25 ), because a partner’s growth brings little benefit when substrate is scarce. All strains raise secretion again toward the end of the cycle; this increase is forced by the return condition on the metabolite pools rather than a biological prediction. The strains differ in their schedules according to their growth and secretion traits and their partner-oriented weights. No budget or state bounds besides the return conditions are enabled; the absolute return band of 10 −2 gives the strains room to deviate from the reference allocation. 

60 Time is in h, Xi in gDW L −1, and S, M i in mmol L −1. μi, max , D have units h −1;

KS,i , K M,ij , S in have concentration units. αi is in mmol gDW −1 h−1; YS,i , Y M,ij are in gDW mmol −1; ci, u i are dimensionless. B0 has biomass units; Kdef has metabolite units; ϵM has inverse squared metabolite units. For the default N = 10 , partners are reciprocal pairs (A, B ), (C, D ), . . . , (I, J ),coupled through shared substrate. For odd N > 2, the final strain additionally con-sumes its predecessor’s metabolite. Each player rewards partner biomass as well as its own. All graph, kinetic, initial-state, and weight entries are configurable. The N = 2 

parameters and graph remain unchanged. 

Periodical setting. The substrate feed is modulated as Sin (t) = Sin [1 + 

a sin(2 πt/T per )] with forcing period Tper = T . Phase-zero strain densities are fixed; the initial substrate and metabolite pools and the maximal growth rates μi, max are calibrated so that the reference cycle with constant allocations closes. Every player’s problem contains the return conditions |xj (T )−xj (0) | ≤ δ for all 2N +1 states. With a tight band, these shared conditions pin every strain’s allocation to its reference value, so the archived instance uses the looser absolute band δ = 10 −2.Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 0.01 , j = 1 , . . . , 21 terminal (return) 

Parameter instance. 

forcing_period = 80.0 forcing_amplitude = 0.9 periodicity_tolerance = 0.01 N = 10 T = 80.0 B0 = 2.0 Kdef = 0.35 epsilon_M = 1.0e-5 mu_max = [0.1390691175, 0.1534971554, 0.1506718399, 0.1622049706, 0.1648060806, 0.1752300865, 0.1804094155, 0.190391922, 0.1970624911, 0.2069131292] K_S = [5.7, 6.4, 7.1, 7.8, 8.5, 9.2, 9.9, 10.6, 11.3, 12.0] K_M = [0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06; 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064; 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068; 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072; 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076; 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08; 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084; 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06; 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064; 0.08 0.06 0.068 0.076 0.084 0.064 0.072 0.08 0.06 0.068] c = [0.17, 0.19, 0.21, 0.23, 0.25, 0.27, 0.29, 0.31, 0.33, 0.35] alpha = [0.49, 0.53, 0.57, 0.61, 0.65, 0.69, 0.73, 0.77, 0.81, 0.85] Y_S = [0.515, 0.53, 0.545, 0.56, 0.575, 0.59, 0.605, 0.62, 0.635, 0.65] Y_M = [8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0; 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0] 

61 D = 0.05 S_in = 10.0 x0 = [0.1, 0.12, 0.14, 0.16, 0.18, 0.2, 0.22, 0.24, 0.26, 0.28, 2.716672258, 0.4602340172, 0.6105073918, 0.7733384874, 0.9605044771, 1.159541914, 1.383575536, 1.61888453, 1.879760125, 2.151413228, 2.449110336] weights = [0.4 0.01 0.08 0.51; 0.4 0.01222222222 0.08 0.5077777778; 0.4 0.01444444444 0.08 0.5055555556; 0.4 0.01666666667 0.08 0.5033333333; 0.4 0.01888888889 0.08 0.5011111111; 0.4 0.02111111111 0.08 0.4988888889; 0.4 0.02333333333 0.08 0.4966666667; 0.4 0.02555555556 0.08 0.4944444444; 0.4 0.02777777778 0.08 0.4922222222; 0.4 0.03 0.08 0.49] adjacency = [0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0; 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0; 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1; 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0] initial_control = [0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35] control_lower = [0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02] control_upper = [0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95] numerical_x0 = [0.1, 0.12, 0.14, 0.16, 0.18, 0.2, 0.22, 0.24, 0.26, 0.28, 2.716672258, 0.4602340172, 0.6105073918, 0.7733384874, 0.9605044771, 1.159541914, 1.383575536, 1.61888453, 1.879760125, 2.151413228, 2.449110336, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.13 mitochondria: Mitochondrial maintenance competition 

Biological interpretation. Mitochondria continually accumulate damage and are maintained by repair, fusion, and biogenesis, all of which consume energy. In tissues with recurring activity and rest, such as muscle under a daily activity cycle, the cell’s energetic capacity oscillates, and the maintenance of the mitochondrial network has to be timed accordingly. Cells often carry more than one mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variant (heteroplasmy), and mutant mtDNA can expand clonally within a cell because mitochondria replicate and are removed independently of cell division; fusion and fission mix the populations and thereby modulate this expansion (Tam et al. 2015). We therefore interpret the two players as a wild-type (A) and a variant (B) mtDNA subpopulation that draw on one shared energetic pool: the variant contributes slightly less to the energy supply, converts energy into biogenesis less efficiently, and is lost slightly faster, but has a larger replication allowance. Each subpopulation invests in biogenesis to keep its own healthy mass high. The quadratic conversion of healthy into damaged mass is a phenomenological density-dependent damage term, not a mechanism taken from the source. We model one full activity cycle, after which all pools must return to their initial values, with biogenesis effort limited by a budget. 

Literature and provenance. Tam et al. (2015) model the clonal expansion of mtDNA mutations and show that the effect of fusion and fission on this expansion depends on the cellular context. This motivates competing mtDNA subpopulations with a shared energetic environment as players. The source does not formulate a game; the controlled biogenesis, the individual objectives, the shared energy pool, and the periodic activity forcing are benchmark additions, and the wild-type/variant assignment of the parameter contrasts is an interpretation rather than a calibra-tion. All rates, budgets, weights, and initial values below are synthetic, dimensionless benchmark choices, not fitted values from this source. 62 Fig. 16 Reference equilibrium candidate for mitochondria . Interpretation. The energetic capacity 

V follows the activity cycle: it rises to about 1.9 during the high-supply first quarter ( t ≈ 10 ), falls to a minimum near 0.09 at t ≈ 31 , and is restored at the end of the cycle. Biogenesis driven by V makes both healthy masses grow with a delay, peaking near t ≈ 22 at about 4.0–4.2; quadratic damage lets the damaged masses follow them and peak a few time units later, and all four pools decline during the low-energy phase. Biogenesis effort follows the healthy-mass peak: both populations increase effort steadily from t ≈ 5 to t ≈ 25 , reduce it while the energy pool is depleted, and make a second push around t ≈ 33 , when energy starts to recover. The variant subpopulation B, which starts without effort and lets its healthy mass drop initially, invests more than A from t ≈ 5 onward. Shortly before the end, both reduce effort sharply and then raise it again in the final interval; this correction is forced by the return condition. Both effort budgets are exhausted ( g1, g 2 active). 

63 Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 5 , nODE = 9 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 11) .

Categories. molecular , periodical , regulation .

Game specification. Mi: healthy mass; Di: damaged mass; V : energetic capacity. 

ui: maintenance/biogenesis effort. Quadratic damage is a phenomenological crowding term. ˙Mi = si + aiuiV / (1 + V ) − diMi − kf M 2 

> i

+ kr Di,

˙Di = kf M 2 

> i

− (kr + dD)Di,

˙V = vA + vB − [dV + η(DA + DB + uA + uB )] V. 

Controls are open-loop functions of time. Initial-state order: x =(MA, M B , D A, D B , V ); values appear below. Each player i ∈ P minimizes Ji = T −1 R T 

> 0

ℓi dt , with 

ℓi = −w1 

> i

Mi + w2 

> i

u2 

> i

+ w3 

> i

D2 

> i

.wki ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 ; weights are independently configurable. 

˙Zi = u2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ B i.

Budgets are private to each player. The optional path floor is MA ≥ floor . When enabled, it is enforced in every player’s deviation problem. 

Periodical setting. The energetic supply is modulated as (vA + vB )[1 + 

a sin(2 πt/T per )] with forcing period Tper = T , representing recurring activity and rest. The fixed initial state is a point on the reference cycle obtained with constant efforts. Every player’s problem contains the return conditions |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ δ for all five pools; the archived instance uses the absolute band δ = 10 −2, because a tight band lets sequential best responses drift (Section 4). Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y8(T ) ≤ 2 terminal B y9(T ) ≤ 4 terminal A, B |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 0.01 , j = 1 , . . . , 5 terminal (return) 

Parameter instance. 

initial = (0.2, 0.3) forcing_period = 40.0 T = 40.0 forcing_amplitude = 0.9 periodicity_tolerance = 0.01 s = (0.1, 0.1) amp = (5.0, 4.0) d = (0.1, 0.12) kf = 0.08 kr = 0.3 dd = 0.05 v = (0.5, 0.45) 

64 dv = 0.5 eta = 0.1 x0 = (3.128867036, 3.124015553, 2.066994658, 2.016342084, 0.8547536323) w_A = (0.7, 0.2, 0.1) w_B = (0.45, 0.4, 0.15) budgets = (2.0, 4.0) floor = nothing control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [3.128867036, 3.124015553, 2.066994658, 2.016342084, 0.8547536323, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.14 motor: Physically coupled motor control 

Biological interpretation. Joint action, such as two people carrying an object or moving a shared handle, requires each partner to reach their own goals while feeling the other’s forces. In the experiments of Chackochan and Sanguineti (2019), two participants move handles that are connected by a virtual spring; each has to pass through a private via-point on the way to a common target. Because the via-points differ, the partners’ preferences conflict, and the observed movements are well described by a Nash equilibrium between two optimal controllers. We model one reaching episode of 0.5 seconds with arm dynamics driven by muscle activation and force states. The dynamics are linear and the costs quadratic; nonlinearity enters only through the control bounds and the interior-time via-point costs. This makes motor 

a candidate for an analytical cross-check of numerical equilibria. Two people move mechanically coupled handles toward a common target through different via-points. The published model uses individual accuracy and effort costs Chackochan and Sanguineti (2019); related motor games are studied by Braun et al. (2009). Each player controls a two-dimensional muscle command ui(t). Spring forces couple both movements and create conflicting preferences. Our benchmark uses deterministic continuous-time dynamics and open-loop policies. The paper also studies noise, partial information and feedback policies; those are distinct extensions. The published supplementary data contain per-trial indicators but not within-trial trajectories, so the instance cannot be compared with measured trajectories directly. 

Literature and provenance. The mechanical and muscle dynamics, physical coeffi-cients, and accuracy/effort scales follow the supplementary model of Chackochan and Sanguineti (2019). This benchmark fixes the via-point times and uses deterministic open-loop commands with explicit bounds; the published model also considers tim-ing search, feedback, noise, and partial information. The parameter listing fixes the selected numerical instance. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 16 , nODE = 18 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 2) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 0) .

Categories. organismal , episodical , regulation .65 Fig. 17 Reference equilibrium candidate for motor . Interpretation. The hand positions reveal the negotiated movement. Partner A must pass its via-point at x = −0.02 at t = 0 .2, partner B its via-point at x = +0 .02 at t = 0 .4, and both hands must end at the common target (0 , 0.1) . Both partners use saturated bang-type commands at the bound ±30 for large parts of the movement; the control bounds are active, so the instance differs qualitatively from the smooth minimum-effort solutions of the unconstrained source model: A first pulls to the left and pushes upward, reverses its vertical command shortly before its via-point, and then relaxes; B first pushes to the right, reverses to the left around t ≈ 0.24 while A is at its via-point, and pushes right again to reach its own via-point at 

t = 0 .4, braking its vertical motion with a sustained negative command. A’s hand deviates leftward to 

−0.025 near t ≈ 0.26 and B’s rightward to 0.035 near t ≈ 0.3 before both converge on the target. The command reversals implement acceleration and braking and compensate the spring force transmitted by the partner; no additional restrictions are imposed. The state panel is dominated by the muscle force and activation variables, which reach magnitudes above 100 , whereas the hand positions move only a few centimeters. 

66 Game specification. For i ∈ { A, B } and partner j, let pi, v i, f i, a i ∈ R2. In gravity-compensated coordinates, the source mechanics become 

˙pi = vi,

˙vi =  fi + k(pj − pi) − bv i

/m i,

˙fi = ai,

˙ai = ( ui − fi − 2τ a i)/τ 2.

There are 16 physical states and four scalar control components. The spring force on A is the negative of that on B. 

mA = mB = 2 kg , k = 100 N /m, b = 10 Ns /m, τ = 0 .10 s .

These values and the second-order muscle dynamics are specified in the paper’s supplementary model note. For fixed via-point times ti and common target pT , minimize Ji = P5 

> k=1

wki Jik ,

wi ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 , with 

Ji1 = ∥pi(T ) − pT ∥2/s 2 

> T

, Ji2 = ∥vi(T )∥2/s 2 

> v

,Ji3 = ∥pi(ti) − pV,i ∥2/s 2 

> V

, Ji4 = 1

T

Z T

> 0

∥pi − pj ∥2

s2

> d

dt, Ji5 = 1

T

Z T

> 0

∥ui∥2

s2

> u

dt. 

Source scales: sT = 0 .005 m, sv = 0 .005 m/s, sV = 0 .0025 m, sd = 0 .025 m, su = 15 

N. Equal normalized weights correspond to the source’s unit effort multiplier, up to an irrelevant common objective scale. Fixing ti is our simplification; the source additionally searches over crossing times. The implementation evaluates interior-time costs at control-grid points ti; both the coarse and refined grids must contain these times. No state or budget bounds are enabled. 

Parameter instance. 

T = 0.5 m = (2.0, 2.0) k = 100.0 b = 10.0 tau = 0.1 s_T = 0.005 s_v = 0.005 s_V = 0.0025 s_d = 0.025 s_u = 15.0 target = (0.0, 0.1) via_A = (-0.02, 0.05) via_B = (0.02, 0.05) via_times = (0.2, 0.4) w_A = (0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2) 

67 w_B = (0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2) umax = 30.0 x0 = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] initial = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0) control_lower = [-30.0, -30.0, -30.0, -30.0] control_upper = [30.0, 30.0, 30.0, 30.0] numerical_x0 = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.15 neural: Excitatory–inhibitory regulation 

Biological interpretation. Cortical circuits alternate between states of higher and lower excitability, and the balance between excitation and inhibition must be main-tained throughout. We interpret the Wilson–Cowan populations as one local circuit subject to a slow modulation of background drive, e.g., by neuromodulatory tone, over many population time constants; units are dimensionless. We introduce two regulatory influences: one supports a higher target level of excitatory activity, the other favors lower excitation and a moderate inhibitory level. The game is periodical: after one full cycle of the background drive, both activities must return to their initial values. Wilson–Cowan models describe coupled excitatory and inhibitory population activity Wilson and Cowan (1972). We introduce two regulatory agents controlling the drive to each population. Their distinct targets and effort costs form the game extension used here. Agent A chooses excitatory drive uA to support activity. Agent B chooses inhibitory drive uB to regulate excitation. The states E, I are dimensionless activity variables. 

Literature and provenance. The excitatory–inhibitory population structure fol-lows Wilson and Cowan (1972). We use an unshifted sigmoid, add sinusoidal background drive, and assign the two control inputs to regulators with different tracking targets. The objective weights, control bounds, return tolerance, and tuned numerical instance are benchmark choices. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 2 , nODE = 4 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 4) .

Categories. organismal , periodical , regulation .

Game specification. Use a bounded, unshifted sigmoid variant of the population model: 

Sk(z) = 11 + exp[ −ak(z − bk)] , k ∈ { E, I },τE ˙E = −E + (1 − E)SE (cEE E − cEI I + Π( t) + uA),τI ˙I = −I + (1 − I)SI (cIE E − cII I + Q + uB ).

The unshifted sigmoid is an explicit modeling choice; parameter values are starting guesses, not a reproduction of the 1972 experiments. For E(0) , I (0) ∈ [0 , 1] , the vector field points inward on the boundary. Population-level input drives represent effective regulation. 68 Fig. 18 Reference equilibrium candidate for neural . Interpretation. Over the slow cycle ( T = 100 ), player A applies a strong excitatory drive at the beginning to lift the excitatory activity E from 0.17 

toward its target, then settles to a moderate drive that follows the slow background oscillation (lower during the first half, when the background drive is high, and higher in the second half), and finally withdraws drive, because the return condition requires E to return to its initial level at the end of the cycle. Player B, who prefers lower excitation, uses its inhibitory drive sparingly in four short pulses of about 0.1, which shape the inhibitory activity I without large cost. As a result E stays between 

0.20 and 0.23 for most of the cycle, a compromise closer to B’s target than to A’s, with local maxima near t ≈ 13 and t ≈ 90 , while I rises to 0.15 early and relaxes toward 0.115 in the second half. No effort budgets or additional path bounds are enabled; the return conditions alone force the terminal descent of both activities. 

69 Write ⟨z⟩ = T −1 R T 

> 0

z dt and define 

JA = w1

> A

⟨(E − EA)2⟩ + w2

> A

⟨(uA/¯u)2⟩ + w3

> A

(E(T ) − EA)2,JB = w1 

> B

⟨(E − EB )2⟩ + w2 

> B

⟨(uB /¯u)2⟩ + w3 

> B

⟨(I − IB )2⟩.

Both objectives are minimized, wi ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 . Choose EA > E B to introduce conflicting excitation targets. Because the return band fixes E(T ) ≈ E(0) , the terminal term w3

> A

(E(T ) − EA)2 is nearly constant and has no strategic effect. 

wA = (0 .8, 0.1, 0.1) , wB = (0 .4, 0.5, 0.1) .

There are no effort budgets; the biological return bands below are imposed on both players. The control bounds and all objective weights are synthetic choices. 

Periodical setting. The background excitatory input is modulated as Π( t) = ¯Π + 

a sin(2 πt/T per ) with forcing period Tper = T , representing a slow excitability cycle. The fixed initial activities lie on the reference cycle obtained with constant drives, and every player’s problem contains the return conditions |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ δ for E and I.Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A, B |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 0.0001 , j = 1 , . . . , 2 terminal (return) 

Parameter instance. 

forcing_period = 100.0 T = 100.0 forcing_amplitude = 0.2 periodicity_tolerance = 0.0001 c_EE = 16.0 c_EI = 12.0 c_IE = 15.0 c_II = 3.0 a_E = 1.3 a_I = 2.0 b_E = 4.0 b_I = 3.7 tau_E = 8.0 tau_I = 8.0 P = 1.0 Q = 0.0 E_A = 0.35 E_B = 0.15 I_B = 0.2 umax = 2.0 x0 = (0.1726288025, 0.1072703456) initial = (0.5, 0.5) w_A = (0.8, 0.1, 0.1) w_B = (0.4, 0.5, 0.1) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [2.0, 2.0] numerical_x0 = [0.1726288025, 0.1072703456, 0.0, 0.0] 

70 A.16 phage: Bacterium–phage interaction 

Biological interpretation. Bacteria and their viruses (phages) coevolve in an arms race: bacteria express surface modifications, restriction systems, or CRISPR immu-nity that reduce adsorption, and phages respond with receptor-binding variants that increase infectivity, often at a cost in burst size. Within a single growth episode, for example one batch culture or one bloom, these traits are regulated phenotypically rather than by mutation, and their expression follows the commanded level only with a delay. We model one such episode: the bacterial population invests in resistance against the cost of reduced growth, while the phage population adjusts the composition of its released progeny, e.g., via phase-variable or host-range-variant subpopulations, and thereby their average infectivity, to maximize its own net expansion. Use five states to distinguish population densities, the latent period of infection, and expressed phenotypes: 

x = ( x1, x 2, x 3, x 4, x 5)⊤ =



susceptible bacteria infected bacteria free-phage density expressed resistance expressed infectivity 

 .

A chooses target resistance uA; B chooses target infectivity uB :

τA ˙x4 = uA − x4, τB ˙x5 = uB − x5.

Positive τA, τ B describe response/turnover times, not mutation rates. If x4(0) , x 5(0) ∈

[0 , 1] , these phenotype bounds are invariant. The bacterial target represents regulation; the phage target represents progeny composition. Free phage cannot instantaneously alter an infection apparatus. Herita-ble changes to target policies belong to a separate evolutionary timescale. 

Literature and provenance. Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 and phage Φ2 moti-vate this game. Paterson et al. (2010) compared phage evolution with a co-evolving host and with a fixed host genotype. Experiments with P. aeruginosa and different phages distinguish arms races from fluctuating selection Betts et al. (2014). These studies motivate reciprocal adaptation; the following equations and continuous controls are our modeling hypotheses. A representative bacterial lineage invests in resistance. A representative phage lineage invests in infectivity. Resistance reduces infection but costs growth. Infectivity increases adsorption but reduces progeny yield. Their objectives form a general-sum game. The model represents the latent period by one exponentially distributed infected-cell stage and omits explicit resources, spatial structure, and genotype diversity. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 5 , nODE = 9 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) .

Categories. cellular , episodical , antagonism .71 Fig. 19 Reference equilibrium candidate for phage . Interpretation. The bacterium starts with a resistance target of 0.56 and lowers it slowly during most of the episode, then faster after t ≈ 6 (to 

0.05 at the end). The phage raises its infectivity target from 0.45 to 0.60 at t ≈ 5.8 and then cuts it to zero during the last 0.4 time units. The expressed phenotypes follow with delays: expressed resistance peaks at 0.53 near t ≈ 2.8, and expressed infectivity at 0.59 near t ≈ 6.2. Susceptible bacteria grow from 0.60 to 0.89 at t ≈ 4.1 and then decline to 0.84 as free phage accumulate roughly threefold (from 

0.15 to 0.46 ), accelerating toward the end. The latent compartment stays small (between 0.016 and 

0.046 ) but delays the phage return on infectivity. Both players exhaust their squared-effort budgets (g1, g 2 active). A mechanism consistent with the late relaxation of both targets is that effort spent near T changes the expressed phenotype, and through the latent period the released progeny, only after the episode has ended; this interpretation was not tested by a separate comparison. 

72 Game specification. Let adsorption and burst size depend on the expressed phenotypes: 

a(x4, x 5; p) = a0eαB x5−αAx4 , β(x5; p) = 1 + ( β0 − 1) e−cB x25 , β0 > 1.

With a = a(x4, x 5; p) and β = β(x5; p),

f (x, u A, u B ; p) = 



rx 1[1 − (x1 + x2)/K ] − cAx24x1 − a x 1x3

a x 1x3 − x2/τ L

βx 2/τ L − a(x1 + x2)x3 − mB x3

(uA − x4)/τ A

(uB − x5)/τ B

 .p = ( r, K, c A, a 0, α A, α B , β 0, c B , m B , τ L, τ A, τ B ).r, K : resource-limited growth, with infected cells occupying capacity; cA: resistance cost; mB : phage decay; τL: mean latent period between adsorption and lysis. αA, α B :adsorption sensitivities; cB : infectivity–yield trade-off. Free phage are lost by adsorp-tion to susceptible and infected cells; the burst size is evaluated with the infectivity expressed at lysis. The latent compartment delays the phage return on infectivity investment, which is the mechanism that distinguishes this game from the cili-ate consumer–resource game. Positive initial densities remain positive over a finite horizon. Minimize JA = P3 

> k=1

wkAJAk and JB = P3 

> k=1

wkB JBk with nonnegative, normal-ized weights. All features use fixed unit scales in the scaled benchmark. Objective Weighted term Interpretation 

JA −w1 

> A

log[ x1(T )/x 1,0] Maximize net expansion of uninfected cells 

−w2

> A

R T 

> 0

rx 1 dt Maximize gross birth proxy 

+w3

> A

R T 

> 0

u2 

> A

dt Minimize target effort 

JB −w1 

> B

log[ x3(T )/x 3,0] Maximize net lineage expansion 

−w2

> B

R T 

> 0

β(x5; p)x2/τ L dt Maximize gross phage release 

+w3

> B

R T 

> 0

u2 

> B

dt Minimize target effort The gross-production hypotheses can favor turnover rather than persistence. The bacterial rx 1 feature treats density limitation as crowding loss; this decomposition is an additional biological hypothesis. 73 Use θ = ( UA, U B , ε A, ε B , σ UA , σ UB , σ εA , σ εB ). A switch σ ∈ { 0, 1} determines whether its restriction is enabled. 

gA[x, u A, u B ; p, θ ] ≥ 0 : UA − R T 

> 0

u2 

> A

dt ≥ 0 if σUA = 1 ,x1(t) − εA ≥ 0 if σεA = 1; 

gB [x, u A, u B ; p, θ ] ≥ 0 : UB − R T 

> 0

u2 

> B

dt ≥ 0 if σUB = 1 ,x3(t) − εB ≥ 0 if σεB = 1 .

Effort budgets concern target investment; expressed-phenotype costs already enter f .Optional density floors encode persistence hypotheses. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y8(T ) ≤ 1.8 terminal B y9(T ) ≤ 2 terminal 

Parameter instance. 

T = 8.0 r = 1.0 K = 1.0 c_A = 0.1 a0 = 0.3 alpha_A = 2.0 alpha_B = 1.5 beta0 = 4.0 c_B = 0.3 m_B = 0.4 latent = 0.5 tau_A = 0.75 tau_B = 0.5 x0 = (0.6, 0.02, 0.15, 0.2, 0.2) w_A = (0.6, 0.3, 0.1) w_B = (0.9, 0.0, 0.1) scales_A = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) scales_B = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) U_A = 1.8 U_B = 2.0 epsilon_A = nothing epsilon_B = nothing umax = (1.0, 1.0) initial = (0.2, 0.2) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [-0.5108256238, -3.912023005, -1.897119985, 0.2, 0.2, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

74 A.17 plantNitrogen: Competing plants and nitrogen 

Biological interpretation. In temperate grasslands and crops, neighboring plants compete for a pulse of soil nitrogen in early spring, when mineralization has built up a pool that roots can exploit before the growing season proceeds. Nitrogen taken up early builds photosynthetic capacity, which later drives carbon gain, but the plants also shade one another, and root uptake capacity is costly to build and maintain. Roots cannot deplete soil mineral nitrogen below a minimal concentration at which net uptake ceases; this threshold is represented as a shared floor on S. We model one growing season; its end is not required to reproduce the initial state, since senescence and winter processes connect consecutive seasons. 

Literature and provenance. Competition for nitrogen and asymmetric light acqui-sition motivate independent plant players (Goldberg et al. 2017). The players are separate plants rather than organs of one plant, so that independent objectives are not attributed to coordinated organs. Competition between separate plants for a shared soil resource has been formulated as a game in which each plant overinvests in roots relative to growing alone, a prediction confirmed for soybeans (Gersani et al. 2001); here the corresponding investment is a time-dependent uptake effort. All rates, bud-gets, weights, and initial values below are synthetic, dimensionless benchmark choices, not fitted values from this source. 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 7 , nODE = 13 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 2) .

Categories. population , seasonal , competition , variable-N .

Game specification. S: soil nitrogen; Ni: plant nitrogen; Ci: carbon pool. ui: uptake investment. L is algebraic available light, not an ODE state. 

L = light 1 + shade P 

> j∈P

Cj

, ˙S = D(Sin − S) − S X

> j∈P

uj ,

˙Ni = uiS − ρiNi, ˙Ci = ViNi

LKi + L − diCi.

Controls are open-loop functions of time. Initial-state order: x = ( S, (Ni)i∈P , (Ci)i∈P );values appear below. Each player i ∈ P minimizes Ji = T −1 R T 

> 0

ℓi dt , with 

ℓi = −w1 

> i

Ci + w2 

> i

u2 

> i

+ w3 

> i

N 2 

> i

.

The penalty N 2 

> i

represents a cost of storing nitrogen, e.g., nitrate accumulation. wki ≥

0, P 

> k

wki = 1 ; weights are independently configurable. 

˙Zi = u2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ B i.

Budgets are private to each player. The enabled path floor is S ≥ 0.2. When enabled, it is enforced in every player’s deviation problem. Enabled bounds: 75 Fig. 20 Reference equilibrium candidate for plantNitrogen . Interpretation. All three plants start the season at maximal uptake and draw the soil nitrogen pool down from 2 to the uptake threshold of 0.2 within less than two time units ( g4 active); afterwards the floor limits the joint uptake, and the plants share the slowly replenished pool. They then reduce uptake at different rates: A, which weighs effort costs most, drops to about 0.3 almost immediately and tapers off; B keeps an intermediate schedule; and C, which values carbon most, maintains high uptake longest and exhausts its effort budget ( g3 active). Plant nitrogen therefore peaks early and moderately for A ( t ≈ 1.2), later for B (t ≈ 3), and latest and highest for C ( t ≈ 8), after which it declines through turnover ( ρi). Carbon rises in a sigmoidal fashion for all plants and saturates toward the end of the season as mutual shading increases; A reaches the largest carbon pool despite its smaller nitrogen store. Once uptake has ceased around t ≈ 11 , soil nitrogen recovers to about 1.

76 Owners Bound Location A y11 (T ) ≤ 4.2 terminal B y12 (T ) ≤ 4.8 terminal C y13 (T ) ≤ 5.4 terminal A, B, C 0.2 ≤ y1(t) path 

Parameter instance. 

> N = 3 T = 12.0 rho = [0.1, 0.12, 0.14] V = [1.0, 0.9090909091, 0.8333333333] K = [0.3, 0.4, 0.5] d = [0.08, 0.1, 0.12] D = 0.2 Sin = 2.0 light = 1.0 shade = 0.1 x0 = [2.0, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1] w_A = (0.15, 0.8, 0.05) w_B = (0.35, 0.55, 0.1) w_C = (0.65, 0.25, 0.1) budgets = [4.2, 4.8, 5.4] floor = 0.2 initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [2.0, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]

## A.18 plantWater: Root investment across shared soil layers 

Biological interpretation. In seasonally dry ecosystems, plants must build their root systems during the wet part of the season in order to extract water that is stored in the soil when rainfall declines. Soil layers differ in how much water they hold and how quickly it is replenished, and species differ in the depth at which their roots are most effective. Roots are costly to build and to maintain, and water taken from a layer is no longer available to neighbors rooting in the same layer. We model one growing season with a wet first half and a dry second half; four plants allocate root investment across the layers and are limited by a seasonal water-uptake allowance. A and D specialize on the top layer, B on the middle and C on the deep layer (rows of 

uptake ). The seasonal allowance is a synthetic proxy for a cumulative transpiration limit imposed by hydraulic safety; it is not a physiological quota. Players are N ≥ 2 plants in L ≥ 2 shared soil layers. Wk: soil water; Rik : plant i’s roots in layer k; Bi: biomass. Each plant owns L root-investment controls uik . State order is soil water by layer, roots by player then layer, and plant biomass by player; controls also list all layers of one plant before the next plant. The archived dimensions are given below. All controls depend on time alone. 

Literature and provenance. The source treats root proliferation as an evolutionary game in shared resource patches (O’Brien et al. 2007). We construct a finite-horizon 77 Fig. 21 Reference equilibrium candidate for plantWater . Interpretation. All plants invest heavily in roots at the start of the season, mostly at the upper bound, and shut off new investment layer by layer between t ≈ 2 and t ≈ 4, well before the dry second half. Root stocks accordingly peak between 

t ≈ 2 and t ≈ 3 and then decay slowly, but the established roots keep drawing water: the top layer, initially the wettest, is depleted almost completely by t ≈ 6, and the middle and deep layers first gain water from the wet-season rain and are then drawn down as rainfall fades. Each plant builds the largest root stock in its preferred layer, and the two top-layer specialists split that layer. Biomass grows by roughly a factor of two until t ≈ 4–5 and declines slightly during the dry end of the season, when uptake no longer covers maintenance. Plants B and C exhaust their seasonal water allowances (g2, g 3 active), whereas A and D remain below theirs, so the allowance, rather than root cost alone, limits the middle- and deep-layer specialists. 

78 water-allocation game with explicit root and biomass dynamics, seasonal replenish-ment, and water-use quotas. Soil layers replace the source spatial geometry; this is not its calibrated model. A game-theoretic model with a glasshouse test predicts and observes root overproliferation and reduced reproductive yield when soybean plants share soil, a tragedy of the commons (Gersani et al. 2001); the present game allows the analogous overinvestment in roots under a shared water resource. All numerical defaults are synthetic and dimensionless; no fitted biological values or source equilibrium results are asserted. 

Dimensions. N = 4 , nx = 19 , nODE = 27 , (nu,i )i∈P = (4 × 3) , (ng,i )i∈P = (4 × 1) .

Categories. population , seasonal , competition , variable-N .

Game specification. Water uptake and seasonally replenished soil obey 

Vik = cik Rik 

Wk

h + Wk

, ˙Wk = Ik[1 + s sin(2 πt/T )] − δW k − X

> i∈P

Vik .

˙Rik = gu ik 

Bi

1 + Bi

− dRRik ,

˙Bi = Bi

"

e P 

> k

Vik 

1 + Bi

− dB − κB i − cu

X

> k

u2

> ik

#

.cik = uptake , h = half , Ik = rain , s = seasonality , δ = evaporation ;

g, d R, e, d B , κ, c u correspond to root_growth, root_loss, assimilation, mortality, crowding, root_cost . 0 ≤ s ≤ 1 preserves nonnegative inflows. Each player minimizes 

Ji = 1

T

Z T

> 03

X

> k=1

wki ℓik dt, wki ≥ 0, X

> k

wki = 1 .

There is no terminal objective. Each weight row is independently configurable. 

(ℓi1, ℓ i2, ℓ i3) = −Bi, X

> k

u2

> ik

, X

> k

R2

> ik

!

.

Candidates represent biomass benefit, investment effort, and root maintenance. The growth equation also accounts for a physiological investment cost; its coefficient and the preference weights have distinct roles. Water allowance: ˙Zi = P 

> k

Vik , Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ budgets i (water amount, not effort). For each plant’s deviation enforce Wk(t) ≥ floors k for every enabled layer. Default: four allowances; soil-water floors are disabled. Enabling all three layer floors adds twelve player/layer entries (three distinct shared floors). Water is removed once in the soil balance, irrespective of how many players enforce a floor. For q biological states, append N cost integrals then N budget integrals, all initially zero; the cost integrals include the factor 1/T , the ODE dimension is q + 2 N , and 

Ji = xq+ι(i)(T ).Enabled bounds: 79 Owners Bound Location A y24 (T ) ≤ 2.3 terminal B y25 (T ) ≤ 2.7 terminal C y26 (T ) ≤ 3.1 terminal D y27 (T ) ≤ 3.5 terminal 

Parameter instance. 

N = 4 layers = 3 T = 8.0 rain = [0.25, 0.4, 0.55] seasonality = 0.8 evaporation = 0.12 uptake = [0.9 0.3 0.3; 0.324 0.972 0.324; 0.348 0.348 1.044; 1.116 0.372 0.372] half = 0.4 root_growth = 0.9 root_loss = 0.18 assimilation = 1.2 mortality = 0.05 crowding = 0.03 root_cost = 0.02 x0 = [1.8, 0.9, 0.5, 0.12, 0.06, 0.09, 0.06, 0.09, 0.12, 0.09, 0.12, 0.06, 0.12, 0.06, 0.09, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2] budgets = [2.3, 2.7, 3.1, 3.5] weights = [0.85 0.06 0.09; 0.8 0.08666666667 0.1133333333; 0.75 0.1133333333 0.1366666667; 0.7 0.14 0.16] floors = [nothing, nothing, nothing] initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [1.8, 0.9, 0.5, 0.12, 0.06, 0.09, 0.06, 0.09, 0.12, 0.09, 0.12, 0.06, 0.12, 0.06, 0.09, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.19 pollination: Nectar investment and pollinator visitation 

Biological interpretation. Flowering plants and their pollinators interact during a limited flowering season. Plants invest in nectar, which is collected by visitors that transfer pollen, while pollinators allocate foraging time among plant species according to the nectar reward and their own handling efficiency. Nectar is costly for the plant, visitation is costly for the pollinator, and pollinator populations depend on the nectar they collect. We model one flowering season of two plant and two pollinator species; the plant state Pi is reproductive biomass (flowers and developing seeds), which pollinator visits increase within the season; each pollinator is more efficient on one plant species, and all players are limited by effort budgets and population floors. The end of the season is linked to the next one through seed and overwintering stages, not through periodic return. There are np ≥ 2 plant and nq ≥ 2 pollinator players ( N = np + nq ). Pi: reproduc-tive biomass, νi: nectar, Aj : pollinators; The state order is plant abundances, their nectar pools, then pollinator abundances, alphabetically within each group. Plant i

80 chooses nectar investment si. Pollinator j chooses np visitation intensities aji , with actual allocation πji = aji /(1 + P 

> k∈P plant

ajk ); residual time is not spent visiting. Control order: all si, then the np intensities of each pollinator. All controls depend on time alone. The player set Pplant contains the first np players, and Ppoll = P \ P plant .In the archived instance, these are {A, B } and {C, D }.

Literature and provenance. The source links pollinator foraging preferences to competing plant population dynamics (Revilla and Křivan 2016). We introduce independently controlled nectar production and visitation in a multi-plant, multi-pollinator game with explicit nectar pools. Source adaptive-preference dynamics are replaced by open-loop controls; equivalence is not claimed. Plant–pollinator reward interactions have also been analyzed as a signalling game, in which the stability of honest nectar advertisement depends on signal costs and pollinator learning (Sun et al. 2018); the present game contains no signal and treats nectar as a direct reward. All numerical defaults are synthetic and dimensionless; no fitted biological values or source equilibrium results are asserted. 

Dimensions. N = 4 , nx = 6 , nODE = 14 , (nu,i )i∈P = (1 , 1, 2, 2) , (ng,i )i∈P = (4 × 2) .

Categories. population , seasonal , mutualism , variable-N .

Game specification. Visits remove nectar at rate 

Vji = κji πji Aj

νi

h + νi

.

˙Pi = Pi

"

r(1 − Pi/K ) + b P 

> j∈P poll

Vji 

h + Pi

− cν s2

> i

#

, ˙νi = αs iPi − δν νi − X

> j∈P poll

Vji ,

˙Aj = e X

> i∈P plant

Vji −

m + cAAj + cu

X

> i∈P plant

a2

> ji

 Aj .κ = visit (pollinator rows); h = half ; b, c ν , α, δ ν , e, m, c A, c u map to 

benefit, nectar_cost, nectar_rate, nectar_loss, conversion, mortality, crowding, effort_cost . Nectar uptake vanishes at a depleted nectar pool. Each player minimizes 

Ji = 1

T

Z T

> 03

X

> k=1

wki ℓik dt, wki ≥ 0, X

> k

wki = 1 .

There is no terminal objective. Each weight row is independently configurable. For plant i:

(ℓi1, ℓ i2, ℓ i3) = ( −Pi, s 2 

> i

, ν 2 

> i

).

For pollinator j, with Ij = P 

> i∈P plant

Vji :

(ℓj, 1, ℓ j, 2, ℓ j, 3) = 

−Aj , X

> i∈P plant

a2

> ji

, 11 + Ij

 .

81 Fig. 22 Reference equilibrium candidate for pollination . Interpretation. Each pollinator specializes on the plant it handles most efficiently: C concentrates its visits on plant A after briefly visiting plant B at the very start, and D visits plant B almost exclusively, with only marginal visits to A late in the season. C’s visitation rises to a maximum of about 0.57 near t ≈ 1.5 and declines afterwards, while D’s decreases steadily from 0.46 ; both pollinators exhaust their seasonal effort budgets ( g3, g 4

active). Plant A, which starts small, invests strongly in nectar early (from 0.39 ) and then reduces investment, consistent with the visit-driven gain in its reproductive biomass, while plant B, already large, invests little throughout; both stop nectar production late in the season, consistent with the finite horizon: nectar produced late can hardly raise the time-averaged reproductive biomass. Nectar of plant A accumulates to a maximum near t ≈ 2.8 before being depleted by visits, whereas plant B’s initial nectar pool is drawn down from the start. Plant reproductive biomasses grow logistically, A more than threefold, and approach the carrying capacity. Pollinator D’s population first increases and then declines to 0.43 as nectar runs out, and C’s population varies only moderately. The plant budgets and all population floors remain slack. 

82 Plants value reproductive biomass and penalize investment and surplus nectar; pollinators value abundance and penalize effort and food shortfall. Use ˙Zi = s2 

> i

for plants and ˙Zj = P 

> i∈P plant

a2 

> ji

for pollinators; Z(0) = 0 and 

Zi(T ) ≤ budgets i. Population path floors apply to the corresponding plant or pollina-tor (the nectar states have no floor). Default: four budgets and four path population restrictions. For q biological states, append N cost integrals then N budget integrals, all initially zero; the cost integrals include the factor 1/T , the ODE dimension is q + 2 N , and 

Ji = xq+ι(i)(T ).Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y11 (T ) ≤ 0.96 terminal B y12 (T ) ≤ 0.32 terminal C y13 (T ) ≤ 1.44 terminal D y14 (T ) ≤ 0.64 terminal A 0.12 ≤ y1(t) path B 0.12 ≤ y2(t) path C 0.1 ≤ y5(t) path D 0.1 ≤ y6(t) path 

Parameter instance. 

plants = 2 pollinators = 2 T = 8.0 r = 0.5 K = 2.0 benefit = 0.4 nectar_cost = 0.04 nectar_rate = 1.5 nectar_loss = 0.5 half = 0.3 visit = [0.95 0.2; 0.23 1.0925] conversion = 1.5 mortality = 0.2 crowding = 0.06 effort_cost = 0.04 x0 = [0.6, 1.5, 0.1, 0.8, 0.25, 0.75] weights = [0.88 0.08 0.04; 0.65 0.3 0.05; 0.8 0.06 0.14; 0.5 0.3 0.2] budgets = [0.96, 0.32, 1.44, 0.64] floors = [0.12, 0.12, 0.1, 0.1] initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.6, 1.5, 0.1, 0.8, 0.25, 0.75, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.20 predatorPrey: Multiple prey/predator game 

Biological interpretation. Predator–prey communities in enriched environments, such as plankton in eutrophic lakes or rodents and their predators, often oscillate 83 on their own: prey increase until predators become abundant, predators then deplete the prey and decline, and the cycle repeats (the paradox of enrichment (Rosenzweig 1971)). Rapid prey evolution can shape such consumer–resource cycles (Yoshida et al. 2007). Within such cycles, prey can invest in defense or faster growth, and predators in hunting effort or in reducing their own mortality. The cycle length is not imposed by an external clock; it emerges from the interactions and can be modified by the players’ strategies. We model one full cycle of a community with three prey and two predator species. Prey species A is assigned the choice of the cycle duration; this uses the same duration-ownership convention as circadianCycle .There are nprey ≥ 2 prey and npred ≥ 2 predators, each a player (N =

nprey + npred ). Xi: prey density; Yj : predator density. State order is x =(( Xi)i∈P prey , (Yj )j∈P pred ). Prey controls (di, g i) are defense and growth investment; predator controls (hj , v j ) are hunting and maintenance. Controls are ordered by player, with two components each. All controls depend on time alone. The player set Pprey 

contains the first nprey players, and Ppred = P \ P prey . In the archived instance, these are {A, B, C } and {D, E }.

Literature and provenance. The source studies how predator-induced defenses alter predator–prey dynamics (González-Olivares et al. 2017). We use controlled, sat-urating predator–prey interactions with logistic prey growth, and assign separate lineage objectives. The multispecies game and its control costs are our extension; source bifurcation results do not automatically carry over. All numerical defaults are synthetic and dimensionless; no fitted biological values or source equilibrium results are asserted. 

Dimensions. N = 5 , nx = 5 , nODE = 15 , (nu,i )i∈P = (5 × 2) , (ng,i )i∈P = (5 × 11) .

Categories. population , periodical , antagonism , variable-N , freeTime .

Game specification. Set Lji = aji (1+ hj )/(1+ di), the controlled attack coefficient, and the Holling type-II saturation Sj = 1 + η P 

> k∈P prey

Ljk Xk with handling time η.Player A (prey 1) additionally chooses the cycle duration T ; the dynamics are written on normalized time s ∈ [0 , 1] with physical time t = T s :

dX i

ds = T X i

ri(1 − Xi/K i) + bg i − c(d2 

> i

+ g2 

> i

) − X

> j∈P pred

Lji Yj

Sj

 ,dY j

ds = T Y j

 γSj

X

> i∈P prey

Lji Xi − μj

1 + vj

− kY j − c(h2 

> j

+ v2 

> j

)

 .aji is the attack matrix (predator row, prey column); γ is conversion, μj mortality, and k predator self-limitation; b = growth_benefit and c = strategy_cost . With enriched prey (large Ki) and saturating predation, the constant reference strategies produce a stable limit cycle (paradox of enrichment (Rosenzweig 1971)); there is no external clock. The fixed x0 is the point of this cycle where prey 1 crosses its cycle mean upward, and the reference period Tref initializes T ∈ [Tref /2, 2Tref ]. At a zero population boundary its derivative vanishes. 84 Fig. 23 Reference equilibrium candidate for predatorPrey . Interpretation. Prey A lengthens the cycle to T ≈ 17 .4, compared with the constant-control reference period of 16 .6. The states show the classical phase shift of a trophic cycle: the prey peak early (B and C near t ≈ 2.2–2.6, A near 

t ≈ 4.6), the predators follow and peak near t ≈ 7.2–7.6, the prey collapse to minima between t ≈ 11 

and t ≈ 14 , and all populations return to their initial levels at the end of the cycle. The prey keep substantial defense throughout, raising it while predators are abundant (A up to 0.70 , B up to 0.67 

near t ≈ 13 ), and use growth investment mainly early, when predation pressure is low; B stops growth investment in the middle of the cycle and resumes it slightly at the end. The predators hunt and invest in maintenance while prey are available and reduce both efforts to zero in the final third, when prey are scarce, consistent with the low return on hunting effort. The three prey exhaust their mean-effort budgets ( g1–g3 active), whereas the predators’ budgets remain slack. 

85 Each player minimizes a cycle average, 

Ji =

Z 103X

> k=1

wki ℓik ds, wki ≥ 0, X

> k

wki = 1 ,

without terminal objective. Let ni denote player i’s population, ¯ni its mean over the reference cycle, and ei the sum of its two squared controls: 

(ℓi1, ℓ i2, ℓ i3) =  −ni/¯ni, e i, [ni/¯ni − 1] 2 .

These candidates reward abundance, penalize strategy effort, and penalize departures from the reference abundance. Effort budgets bound the mean squared effort per unit time, ˙Zi = ei, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(1) ≤ budgets i; optional path floors ni(s) ≥ floors i are disabled by default. Every player’s problem contains the return conditions |nj (1) −

nj (0) | ≤ δ for all populations. For q biological states, append N cost integrals then N budget integrals, all initially zero; the ODE dimension is q + 2 N and Ji = xq+ι(i)(1) .Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y11 (T ) ≤ 0.35 terminal B y12 (T ) ≤ 0.35 terminal C y13 (T ) ≤ 0.35 terminal D y14 (T ) ≤ 0.35 terminal E y15 (T ) ≤ 0.35 terminal A, B, C, D, E |xj (T ) − xj (0) | ≤ 0.01 , j = 1 , . . . , 5 terminal (return) 

Parameter instance. 

prey = 3 predators = 2 periodicity_tolerance = 0.01 r = [0.9, 1.0, 1.1] K = [3.0, 3.0, 3.0] attack = [0.78 0.54 0.66; 0.54 0.66 0.78] handling = 0.5 conversion = 0.45 mortality = [0.3, 0.35] crowding = 0.03 growth_benefit = 0.25 strategy_cost = 0.12 default_size = true x0 = [0.1981184964, 1.43031613, 1.099886694, 0.8595951089, 0.4409164492] scale = [0.1988327166, 0.9306449029, 0.7068407768, 1.259519777, 0.6566602541] duration = 16.58214832 duration_bounds = (8.291074161, 33.16429664) weights = [0.65 0.25 0.1; 0.65 0.25 0.1; 0.65 0.25 0.1; 0.75 0.2 0.05; 0.75 0.2 0.05] budgets = [0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35, 0.35] floors = [nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing] initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2] 

86 control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.1981184964, 1.43031613, 1.099886694, 0.8595951089, 0.4409164492, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.21 proteinFolding: Chaperone assistance with finite effort 

Biological interpretation. When cells experience proteotoxic stress, for example a heat shock, many proteins unfold at once. Molecular chaperones bind unfolded proteins and folding intermediates and assist their folding to the native state, but chaperone capacity is itself limited: it is consumed while chaperones are engaged and restored only slowly by synthesis. Two chaperone systems with different efficiencies (for example, an ATP-dependent chaperonin and a cheaper holdase) share this capacity. We model the recovery episode after a stress pulse, in which each system chooses its assistance effort under a finite effort budget and aims to restore the native protein pool. Because both systems value the same native pool, the game isolates free-riding on assistance effort. 

Literature and provenance. A kinetic model of bacterial proteostasis shows that chaperone-assisted folding trades energy consumption against chaperone utilization (Santra et al. 2017); this supports the finite, consumable chaperone capacity and the effort costs, not the division of assistance into competing players. Two chaperone modules have different effort preferences; the game is a hypothetical decomposition of cellular control, not a published Nash model. All rates, budgets, weights, and initial values below are synthetic, dimensionless benchmark choices, not fitted values from this source. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 4 , nODE = 8 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) .

Categories. molecular , episodical , regulation .

Game specification. U, I, N : unfolded, intermediate, native protein; Ch : chaper-one capacity. ui: module effort. v = ( c1uA + c2uB ) Ch I is assisted conversion, with efficiencies (c1, c 2) = c; since c1 > c 2, system A is the more efficient one. 

˙U = −kf U + kuI − dU U, ˙I = kf U − (ku + kn)I − v, 

˙N = knI − dN N + v, ˙Ch = s0 − ca(uA + uB ) Ch I − da Ch. 

Controls are open-loop functions of time. Initial-state order: x = ( U, I, N, Ch ); values appear below. The supply rate is s0 = A0 .Each player i ∈ P minimizes Ji = T −1 R T 

> 0

ℓi dt , with 

ℓi = w1 

> i

(N − 1) 2 + w2 

> i

u2 

> i

.wki ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 ; weights are independently configurable. 

˙Zi = u2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ B i.

87 Fig. 24 Reference equilibrium candidate for proteinFolding . Interpretation. After the stress pulse, most protein is unfolded ( 0.8) and chaperone capacity is full. Both chaperone systems respond imme-diately: the efficient system A starts near 0.43 , peaks at about 0.5, and then reduces its effort steadily, whereas the less efficient system B contributes about half as much and tapers in parallel. Assisted folding consumes chaperone capacity faster than it is resynthesized, so capacity falls to about half its initial value near t ≈ 2.4 and recovers slowly afterwards as the need for assistance declines. Unfolded protein is converted quickly into folding intermediates, which peak near t ≈ 0.75 at more than twice their initial level, and the native pool rises sigmoidally to about 0.81 by the end of the episode. Sys-tem A exhausts its effort budget ( g1 active), while B stays below its budget; the transient depletion of the shared chaperone capacity limits how much the two systems can accelerate folding at the peak of demand. 

88 Budgets are private to each player. The optional path floor is N ≥ floor . When enabled, it is enforced in every player’s deviation problem. Enabled bounds:             

> Owners Bound Location Ay7(T)≤0.4terminal By8(T)≤0.24 terminal

Parameter instance. 

> initial = (0.2, 0.3) T = 8.0 kf = 1.5 ku = 0.6 kn = 0.3 du = 0.02 dn = 0.01 c = (0.8, 0.5) ca = 2.0 da = 0.2 A0 = 0.2 x0 = (0.8, 0.2, 0.0, 1.0) w_A = (0.85, 0.15) w_B = (0.75, 0.25) budgets = (0.4, 0.24) floor = nothing control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [0.8, 0.2, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]

## A.22 seedGermination: Seed-cohort germination under shared water 

Biological interpretation. Seeds in the same soil patch compete for water dur-ing imbibition and germination in the germination window after the first autumn rains. Rapid activation of the embryo lets a seed emerge first and secure light and space, but it consumes water that neighboring seeds also need, and activation itself is metabolically costly. Once the first seed has completed radicle emergence, the com-petitive situation changes fundamentally. We model this seasonal window for three seed cohorts sharing one water pool; it ends when the leading cohort reaches radi-cle emergence. Cohort A owns the duration, so only its time weight is strategically relevant (Section 2.4). 

Literature and provenance. A, B, C: three seed cohorts controlling activation effort (Bradford 1990). Cohort A controls the emergence schedule. 

x = ( W, A A, A B , A C , G A, G B , G C ): shared water, activation levels, and cumulative radicle development. The hydrotime analysis of Bradford (1990) supports only the mechanism that germination rate increases with water availability above a threshold. Germination timing under competition among individuals has been analyzed as an evolutionary game, with competition acting through growth, mortality, or recruitment 89 Fig. 25 Reference equilibrium candidate for seedGermination . Interpretation. The leading cohort A activates its embryos at the maximal rate for three quarters of the episode and relaxes only shortly before its radicle progress reaches the emergence threshold at T ≈ 3.1 (the terminal equality g1 is active for all players). Cohorts B and C, which weigh time less and effort and water burden more, start with moderate activation ( 0.58 and 0.53 ) and reduce it steadily. Embryo activation of A rises to about 1.2 and saturates, while B and C peak near 0.49 and 0.39 at t ≈ 2.2 and decline afterwards. Radicle progress accumulates in a convex fashion and reaches 1 for A but only about 0.55 and 0.5 for B and C, so A emerges well ahead of its competitors. The shared water pool falls from 1.5 to about 

1.14 while activation is high and recovers once the cohorts relax. The effort budgets, the water floor, and the radicle-progress ceilings of B and C remain slack. 

90 (Bessho and Iwasa 2012); our game resolves one germination window and does not predict evolutionarily stable dates. The activation states and interacting-cohort game are synthetic and are not the hydrotime equations of Bradford (1990). 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 7 , nODE = 13 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 3) .

Categories. population , seasonal , competition , freeTime .

Game specification. 

˙W = q(Wmax − W ) − cW X

> j∈P

uj ,

˙Ai = aiuiW/ (K + W ) − diAi,

˙Gi = giAiW/ (K + W ), i ∈ P .q = water_supply , Wmax = water_capacity , c = water_use , a = activation ,

d = decay , g = growth , K = saturation .

Ji = w1 

> i

T + w2

> i

R T 

> 0

u2 

> i

dt + w3

> i

R T 

> 0

Li dt .

Li = ( Gi − ¯G)2, ¯G = P 

> j∈P

Gj /N . The duration term penalizes episode length, effort penalizes activation, and development mismatch penalizes loss of cohort syn-chrony. The synchrony term represents benefits of emerging with the cohort, such as predator satiation; it conflicts with the advantage of emerging first. 

GA(0) = 0 , 1 − GA(T ) ≥ 0 and GA(T ) − 1 ≥ 0, shared by all players. Private effort budgets are (3 , 2.2, 1.5) . A imposes W ≥ 0.5 (a minimum soil moisture for embryo survival), and B and C impose GB ≤ 2.4 and GC ≤ 2.8 (caps on radicle elongation); the ceilings cannot bind before GA = 1 ends the episode. This is leader-cohort emergence, not simultaneous emergence. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A, B, C y5(T ) = 1 terminal A y8(T ) ≤ 3 terminal B y9(T ) ≤ 2.2 terminal C y10 (T ) ≤ 1.5 terminal A 0.5 ≤ y1(t) path B y6(t) ≤ 2.4 path C y7(t) ≤ 2.8 path 

Parameter instance. 

x0 = (1.5, 0.15, 0.12, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0) target = 1.0 water_supply = 0.4 water_capacity = 2.0 water_use = 0.2 activation = (1.0, 0.85, 0.7) decay = (0.4, 0.35, 0.3) growth = (0.5, 0.6, 0.7) saturation = 0.4 duration = 5.0 

91 duration_bounds = (0.1, 20.0) initial = (0.5, 0.45, 0.4) weights = [0.75 0.15 0.1; 0.55 0.3 0.15; 0.45 0.25 0.3] budgets = (3.0, 2.2, 1.5) path_limits = (0.5, 2.4, 2.8) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [1.5, 0.15, 0.12, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.23 sexRatio: Sex allocation among foundresses 

Biological interpretation. When several foundresses lay eggs in the same patch, for example parasitoid wasps in one host cluster or fig wasps in one fig, their sons compete for mates with each other before the daughters disperse (local mate competition). Hamilton’s classical argument (Hamilton 1967) predicts female-biased sex ratios that become less biased as more foundresses share the patch. Here the foundresses provision their brood from a shared resource that is replenished seasonally, and producing sons is more resource-intensive. Each foundress chooses the fraction of its offspring that are male over one reproductive season; offspring success depends on the numbers of sons and daughters of all foundresses, and the shared brood resource must not fall below a floor. This floor is a synthetic persistence restriction; noncooperative foundresses would not impose it on themselves. The controls represent male-allocation fractions rather than discrete offspring choices. 

Literature and provenance. Local mate competition and mate limitation support multiple foundresses and frequency-dependent mating returns (Lehtonen and Schwanz 2018). The following finite-horizon proxy is not a reproduction of the published evo-lutionary stability analysis. All rates, budgets, weights, and initial values below are synthetic, dimensionless benchmark choices, not fitted values from this source. 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 7 , nODE = 13 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 2) .

Categories. population , seasonal , competition , variable-N .

Game specification. R: brood resource; Fi, M i: surviving daughters and sons. ui:male fraction chosen by foundress i. Default N = 3 ; FΣ = P 

> j∈P

Fj , MΣ = P 

> j∈P

Mj .

b∗ 

> i

= biR/ (K + R), ˙R = s(t) − decay R − cost X

> j∈P

b∗ 

> j

(1 + cmuj ),s(t) = supply[1 − as cos(2 πt/T )] , as = seasonality , c m = male _cost ,

˙Fi = b∗ 

> i

(1 − ui) − df Fi, ˙Mi = b∗ 

> i

ui − dmMi,Wi = FiMΣ + MiFΣ

mate _half + MΣ

.

Controls are open-loop functions of time. Initial-state order: x =(R, (Fi)i∈P , (Mi)i∈P ); values appear below. 92 Fig. 26 Reference equilibrium candidate for sexRatio . Interpretation. All foundresses produce female-biased broods throughout the season: male allocation rises from about 0.2 early to a maximum near 0.34 –0.40 in the middle of the season and declines again toward the end, when newly produced sons have little time left to mate. Foundress A, whose squared-allocation budget is exhausted ( g1

active) and which also weighs mating success most, is the most female-biased, especially late in the season (final allocation about 0.03 ). The shared brood resource follows the seasonal supply: it falls from 2 to a minimum near 1.5 at t ≈ 1.6, recovers to about 2 at t ≈ 4 when supply peaks, and is drawn down again to the protective floor at the end of the season ( g4 active). Daughters accumu-late almost linearly (to 2.0, 1.6, and 1.5 for A, B, and C), whereas sons level off at about 0.6–0.7 as male production declines. The effort budgets of B and C remain slack. For comparison, Hamilton’s unbeatable sex ratio under local mate competition with three foundresses is (N − 1) /(2 N ) = 1 /3

(Hamilton 1967). The seasonal allocations ( ≈ 0.2–0.4) bracket this value, but the present objective is a within-season mating proxy, the male-cost term and the squared-allocation budgets also bias allo-cation toward daughters, so agreement is not a test of the classical result. 

93 Each player i ∈ P minimizes Ji = T −1 R T 

> 0

ℓi dt , with 

ℓi = −w1 

> i

Wi + w2 

> i

(ui − 0.5) 2 + w3 

> i

u2 

> i

.

The penalty (ui − 0.5) 2, the term u2 

> i

, and the budget on R T 

> 0

u2 

> i

dt are synthetic: the squared terms represent increasing marginal costs of producing sons (e.g., larger pro-visioning per son), in addition to the male cost cm in ˙R. Fitness is usually measured at the end of the season, as mated daughters at dispersal; here it is the time average of the mating proxy Wi. wki ≥ 0, P 

> k

wki = 1 ; weights are independently configurable. 

˙Zi = u2 

> i

, Zi(0) = 0 , Zi(T ) ≤ B i.

Budgets are private to each player. The default path floor is R ≥ 1.5. Seasonal replen-ishment and sex-dependent provisioning allow drawdown and recovery. The shared floor restricts feasible allocations jointly. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A y11 (T ) ≤ 0.48 terminal B y12 (T ) ≤ 0.78 terminal C y13 (T ) ≤ 1.08 terminal A, B, C 1.5 ≤ y1(t) path 

Parameter instance. 

N = 3 T = 6.0 b = [1.0, 0.8695652174, 0.7692307692] df = 0.12 dm = 0.2 supply = 0.5 seasonality = 0.8 male_cost = 2.0 decay = 0.1 cost = 0.15 K = 1.0 mate_half = 0.5 x0 = [2.0, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1] w_A = (0.8, 0.1, 0.1) w_B = (0.65, 0.2, 0.15) w_C = (0.7, 0.05, 0.25) budgets = [0.48, 0.78, 1.08] floor = 1.5 initial = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2] control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [2.0, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

94 A.24 tupelo: Tupelo–leafminer case study 

Biological interpretation. Leaf-mining insects lay their eggs on young leaves in spring; the larvae then feed inside the leaf blade until they mature or the leaf’s resources run out. For the host tree, chemical defense reduces egg and larval survival but diverts carbon from growth, and the value of leaf tissue declines over the season as leaves age. For the herbivore, the timing of egg hatching determines when larvae meet the host’s defense and how much fresh leaf tissue remains. This "cold war" over timing within one season is a classical plant–herbivore scenario; the end of the season is linked to the next one through overwintering, not through periodic return. The host tree Nyssa sylvatica and the leafminer Antispila nysaefoliella motivate a seasonal game. Low et al. (2013) already studied optimal plant defense and herbivore hatching in this system, including a co-evolutionary calculation. The plant (tupelo) chooses a defense investment schedule uA(t). In Low et al. (2013) defense is induced; here it is an open-loop schedule, i.e., constitutive within the season. The herbivore (leafminer) chooses hatching hazard uB (t).The biological states are usable leaf area L, unhatched eggs E, and feeding larvae 

H per representative leaf, x = ( L, E, H ). The hatching flux is uB E.As in Low et al. (2013), larvae consume leaf tissue at a constant per-capita rate and leave the cohort through pupation or death. The alternative of Section 5.3 instead uses a saturating tissue availability ρ(L) = L/ (K +L) in consumption and maturation. Defense increases egg and larval mortality and thus reduces the cohort and its future feeding pressure. Hatching transfers eggs to larvae, it determines when larvae encounter defense and declining seasonal resources. 

Literature and provenance. Low et al. (2013) supply the model structure (their Eqs. 1–7) and the rates of their coevolution scenario 11 (their Table 2), mapped here to one time unit of 25 days. Open-loop schedules replace their induced defense, a Nash candidate replaces their evolutionarily stable strategies, and small quadratic cost terms regularize the responses. The photoperiod scale t∗ and the season length are our assumptions, since the source does not state them. 

Dimensions. N = 2 , nx = 3 , nODE = 8 , (nu,i )i∈P = (2 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (2 × 0) .

Categories. population , seasonal , antagonism .

Game specification. We use 

f (t, x, u A, u B ; p) = 

 −bρ (L)H

−(uB + μE + dE uA)EuB E − (μH + dH uA + κρ (L)) H

 , x(0) = 

L0

E0

H0

 ,

with p = ( b, K, μ E , μ H , d E , d H , κ, δ A, δ B , t ∗, z ) and ρ(L) = 1 in the reference instance (saturation=false ); saturation=true gives ρ(L) = L/ (K + L).

b is feeding intensity and K is tissue half-saturation. μE , μ H are baseline mortal-ity rates and dE , d H are defense-induced mortality coefficients. The maturation flux 

κρ (L)H contributes to player B’s objective. The rates map scenario 11 of Low et al. (2013) with one time unit of 25 days (Section 5.1). In the parameter listing, δA =

95 Fig. 27 Reference equilibrium candidate for tupelo . Interpretation. The tree defends early with at most 0.30 , mostly between 0.1 and 0.2, and stops defending at t ≈ 4.4, before the leaf value declines. The leafminer releases a small hatching pulse at the start, hatches at a reduced hazard of about 0.2–

0.3 while defense lasts, and hatches at maximal hazard from t ≈ 4.2 until shortly before T . Eggs decline to 0.26 by t = 4 and are nearly exhausted by t = 6 ; larvae stay below 0.08 and peak at t ≈ 4.5.Usable leaf area decreases to about 0.50 , and 46% of the loss occurs after t = 4 . The pattern agrees qualitatively with the delayed mass hatching of Low et al. (2013); unlike in their feedback model, the leafminer does not avoid defense completely (Section 5.2). 

96 p_decay and δB = q_decay . The reference weights are wA = (0 .49 , 0.49 , 0.02 , 0) and 

wB = (0 .98 , 0.02 , 0) .Implementation comment: nonnegativity, decreasing leaf area, and decreasing cohort size are checked by independent integration; they are not extra NLP con-straints. Objective Weighted term Interpretation 

JA −w1

> A

R T 

> 0

p(t)L dt Maximize value-weighted leaf area 

+w2

> A

R T 

> 0

uAL dt Minimize linear defense cost 

+w3

> A

R T 

> 0

u2

> A

L dt Minimize quadratic defense cost 

−w4

> A

L(T ) Maximize terminal leaf tissue 

JB −w1

> B

R T 

> 0

e−δB tκρ (L)H dt Maximize discounted maturation 

+w2

> B

R T 

> 0

u2 

> B

E dt Minimize quadratic hatching cost 

−w3 

> B

H(T ) Reward larvae maturing after T

The leaf value is the photoperiod curve p(t) = e−(t/t ∗)z

of Low et al. (2013) (photoperiod=true ), with t∗ = 6 as our assumption; photoperiod=false gives 

p(t) = e−δAt. The terminal larva term counts larvae that complete development after the modeled window; its weight is zero in the reference instance; Section 5.3 mentions a positive weight as an example of a preference variant. Collect restriction switches (a zero switch omits a particular restriction) and bounds in 

θ = ( σUA , σ UB , σ CA , U A, U B , C A), σUA , σ UB , σ CA ∈ { 0, 1}.

For gA[x, u A, u B ; p, θ ] ≥ 0, impose 

(

UA − R T 

> 0

uA dt ≥ 0 if σUA = 1 ,CA − R T 

> 0

uAL dt ≥ 0 if σCA = 1 .

Note that the carbon allowance CA − R T 

> 0

uAL dt ≥ 0 depends on uB and p through L.For gB [x, u A, u B ; p, θ ] ≥ 0, impose 

UB −

Z T

> 0

uB dt ≥ 0 if σUB = 1 .

All switches are zero in the reference instance, as in Low et al. (2013); the alternative of Section 5.3 sets them to one. No state or budget bounds are enabled. 

Parameter instance. 

T = 8.0 L0 = 1.0 E0 = 1.0 H0 = 0.0 

97 b = 1.5 K = 0.15 muE = 0.0 muH = 1.0 dE = 0.25 dH = 12.5 kappa = 1.0 p_decay = 0.2 q_decay = 0.125 t_star = 6.0 z = 9.0 umax = 1.0 vmax = 1.0 w_A = (0.49, 0.49, 0.02, 0.0) w_B = (0.98, 0.02, 0.0) scales_P = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0) scales_H = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) U_A = nothing U_B = nothing C_A = nothing saturation = false photoperiod = true control_lower = [0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [1.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

## A.25 woundRepair: Wound repair and remodeling 

Biological interpretation. Cutaneous wound healing proceeds through overlapping phases: an inflammatory phase in which neutrophils and macrophages clear debris and release growth factors, a proliferative phase in which fibroblasts migrate in and deposit collagen, and a remodeling phase. Fibroblast activity depends on signals from inflam-matory cells and on oxygen supply, while prolonged inflammation damages tissue and delays closure. We model one healing episode that ends when the wound deficit has fallen to a prescribed residual size, and we assign inflammatory recruitment, fibrob-last recruitment, and oxygen support through angiogenesis to three players who weigh effort, excess inflammation, and collagen quality differently. Inflammatory recruitment (A) owns the completion time; as for other regulatory modules, this is a synthetic allocation of decision authority (Section 2.6), and only A’s time weight is strategically relevant. 

Literature and provenance. Macrophage–fibroblast–collagen interactions moti-vate wound-healing models (Cumming et al. 2010). Here a reduced five-state system assigns inflammatory recruitment, fibroblast recruitment, and oxygen support to sepa-rate players. Duration ownership, objective weights, terminal wound target, and other restrictions are introduced with synthetic coefficients. 

Dimensions. N = 3 , nx = 5 , nODE = 11 , (nu,i )i∈P = (3 × 1) , (ng,i )i∈P = (3 × 3) .

Categories. cellular , episodical , regulation , freeTime .98 Fig. 28 Reference equilibrium candidate for woundRepair . Interpretation. Healing ends at T ≈

7.3, when the wound deficit has fallen from 1 to the prescribed residual 0.25 (terminal equality g1

active for all players). Inflammatory recruitment starts at its maximum and stays there until t ≈ 4,then decreases to zero, using up its entire effort budget ( g2 active). Fibroblast recruitment and oxygen support rise during the first two time units to about 0.59 and 0.49 and decline afterwards, oxygen support earliest. The state trajectories reproduce the classical sequence of healing phases: inflammatory cells rise from 0.2 to a peak near 1 at t ≈ 2.8 and then resolve, fibroblasts follow with a delay and peak near t ≈ 4.4, and collagen accumulates steadily to about 0.42 while the deficit decreases. Oxygen increases slightly while support is given and stays above its floor. The budgets of B and C and the inflammation, collagen, and oxygen bounds remain slack; the transition from inflammation to matrix deposition is driven by the shared closure target and the time cost. 

99 Game specification. 

˙D = −(r1 + r2M + r3F )D, ˙M = b1uAD − d1M, 

˙F = b2uB M O/ (1 + O) − d2F, 

˙K = kK F O/ (1 + O) − d3K, 

˙O = kO(1 + uC )(1 − O) − cO(M + F )O. r = repair , b = recruitment , d = decay , kK = collagen_rate , kO =

oxygen_supply , cO = oxygen_use , K⋆ = collagen_target .

Ji = w1 

> i

T + w2

> i

R T 

> 0

u2 

> i

dt + w3

> i

R T 

> 0

Li dt .

Li = ( K − K⋆)2 + (0 .2 + 0 .1ι(i)) M 2. The duration term penalizes healing time, effort penalizes intervention, and Li balances matrix restoration against inflammation. 

D(0) = 1 , 0.25 − D(T ) ≥ 0 and D(T ) − 0.25 ≥ 0, shared by all players. Private effort budgets are (5 , 4, 3) . A imposes M ≤ 1.4 (limiting collateral damage by excess inflammation), B imposes K ≤ 1.6 (avoiding fibrotic overproduction of matrix), and C imposes O ≥ 0.4 (avoiding hypoxia) along the trajectory. Other terminal states are free. Enabled bounds: 

Owners Bound Location A, B, C y1(T ) = 0 .25 terminal A y6(T ) ≤ 5 terminal B y7(T ) ≤ 4 terminal C y8(T ) ≤ 3 terminal A y2(t) ≤ 1.4 path B y4(t) ≤ 1.6 path C 0.4 ≤ y5(t) path 

Parameter instance. 

x0 = (1.0, 0.2, 0.15, 0.1, 0.8) target = 0.25 repair = (0.04, 0.12, 0.22) recruitment = (0.8, 0.6) decay = (0.5, 0.25, 0.08) oxygen_supply = 0.7 oxygen_use = 0.15 collagen_rate = 0.5 collagen_target = 0.6 duration = 5.0 duration_bounds = (0.1, 20.0) initial = (0.5, 0.45, 0.4) weights = [0.75 0.15 0.1; 0.55 0.3 0.15; 0.45 0.25 0.3] budgets = (5.0, 4.0, 3.0) path_limits = (1.4, 1.6, 0.4) control_lower = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] control_upper = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] numerical_x0 = [1.0, 0.2, 0.15, 0.1, 0.8, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] 

100 B Numerical settings and solver statistics 

This appendix collects the numerical details of Section 4. 

Transcription and nonlinear programs. 

Controls are piecewise constant on M equal intervals. Path restrictions are imposed at four equidistant points per control interval (eight in antColonies ). Single shoot-ing eliminates the state variables by integration with the explicit Tsitouras 5/4 Runge–Kutta method Tsit5 at absolute and relative tolerance 10 −9 (10 −10 in four instances); forward-mode automatic differentiation through the integrator sup-plies derivatives. The nonlinear programs are solved by Ipopt with tolerance 10 −8

and a limited-memory Hessian approximation; three instances ( batchFermentation ,

circadianCycle , immuneClearance ) use exact Hessians. Multiple shooting and the backends BlockSQP2 and Uno are available but not used for the reference records. 

Iteration settings. 

The damping ranges from α = 0 .15 (neural ) to α = 1 , the undamped sweep used in nine instances. Primal warm starts are enabled in five instances, and the round limit 

kmax ranges from 20 to 300. Warm starts reuse the player’s previous primal controls on the same grid. Refinement transfers the coarse controls to the fine grid by interval averaging. 

Audits. 

The interface allows instance-specific reporting scales γi in (11), separate from the feature scales in the objectives. All reported audits use a single start per player and round, namely the current profile or, when primal warm starts are enabled and the grid layout is compatible, the player’s previous response. The implementation supports additional constant-control starts for audits; they were not used for the reference records. For each assigned state restriction c in the bound form (5), let Sc contain either the terminal time or all audit sample times, i.e., eight equidistant points per control interval; the audit thus samples path restrictions at least as densely as the optimization. With [a]+ = max {0, a }, the implemented violation is 

Vi = X

> j: owner( j)= iM

X

> k=1

 [uj − ujk ]+ + [ ujk − uj ]+



+ X

> c: owner( c)= i

max 

> t∈S c

([ ℓc − yqc (t)] + + [ yqc (t) − rc]+) ,

(13) where y is the numerical state of Section 2. An absent finite bound contributes zero. Thus, violations are summed across restrictions after taking the maximum over time for each path restriction. The violation is not normalized across physical units or state transformations; the saved records call it the constraint norm ( norm_g ). The completed profile is reintegrated with Tsit5 at absolute and relative tolerance 10 −10 .101 Independent checks of responses. 

A reintegration of every response at tolerance 10 −10 must satisfy the player’s restrictions and reproduce the shooting objective within 10 −5γi; multiple shooting additionally checks its matching residuals. A response that fails one of these checks stops the computation, so every saved round passed them. The implementation logs unsuccessful nonlinear-programming return codes and uses the returned iterate if the checks pass; a successful return code is not itself a requirement. After an unsuccessful return code, a fallback solver can be started from the returned iterate. Damping can violate nonlinear endpoint restrictions. Such intermediate profiles remain in the iter-ation history, while acceptance requires the completed profile to pass the feasibility audit. 

Reproduction, timing, and solver statistics. 

Reintegrating every saved final control profile with the released model definitions reproduces the saved terminal states, including the objective and budget quadratures, to double precision; the maximum sampled violation of these reintegrations is 9.1·10 −7,below εg = 10 −6. Instance-specific solver options are distributed with the models, and the archived release fixes the Julia environment used to produce the records. The CPU times in Table 3 are medians over all response and audit calls of one grid; the median excludes the effect of compilation in the first call of each grid. They were measured with Julia 1.11 on a machine with eight logical CPU cores and 8 GB memory, with one instance running at a time. The per-response solver logs distinguish outer convergence from inner solver termination. All final deviation-audit calls on both grids report Success for every instance. In motor , nine of the 140 intermediate and final response calls report MaxIters ; the other 131 report Success . All recorded calls in the remaining 24 instances report Success . The motor iterates were accepted under the independent feasibility and objective-consistency checks described above. 

# References 

Adler, F.R., Gordon, D.M.: Optimization, conflict, and nonoverlapping foraging ranges in ants. The American Naturalist 162 (5), 529–543 (2003) https://doi.org/10.1086/ 378856 Andersson, J.A.E., Gillis, J., Horn, G., Rawlings, J.B., Diehl, M.: CasADi – A software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control. Mathematical Program-ming Computation 11 (1), 1–36 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1007/s12532-018-0139-4 Allen, R.E., Rachlin, Y., Ruprecht, J., Loughran, S., Varey, J., Viggh, H.: SpaceGym: Discrete and differential games in non-cooperative space operations. In: 2023 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pp. 1–12. IEEE, Big Sky, MT, USA (2023). https://doi.org/ 10.1109/AERO55745.2023.10115968 Baccam, P., Beauchemin, C., Macken, C.A., Hayden, F.G., Perelson, A.S.: Kinetics of influenza a virus infection in humans. Journal of virology 80 (15), 7590–7599 (2006) https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01623-05 102 Bessho, K., Iwasa, Y.: Variability in the evolutionarily stable seasonal timing of ger-mination and maturation of annuals and the mode of competition. Journal of Theoretical Biology 304 , 66–80 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2012.03.020 Betts, A., Kaltz, O., Hochberg, M.E.: Contrasted coevolutionary dynamics between a bacterial pathogen and its bacteriophages. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 (30), 11109–11114 (2014) https: //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1406763111 Başar, T., Olsder, G.: Dynamic Noncooperative Game Theory, 2nd edn. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia (1982). https://doi.org/10.1016/ s0076-5392(08)x6169-7 Braun, D.A., Ortega, P.A., Wolpert, D.M.: Nash equilibria in multi-agent motor interactions. PLoS Computational Biology 5(8), 1000468 (2009) https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000468 Bradford, K.J.: A water relations analysis of seed germination rates. Plant Physiology 

94 (2), 840–849 (1990) https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.94.2.840 Banga, J.R., Sager, S.: Generalized inverse optimal control and its application in biology. Annual Reviews in Control 60 , 101029 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. arcontrol.2025.101029 Banga, J.R., Villaverde, A.F.: A Hierarchical Framework for Inverse Problems in Biological Cybernetics: Opportunities and Limitations. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (2026). https://doi.org/10.20350/digitalCSIC/29135 Caillau, J.-B., Cots, O., Gergaud, J., Martinon, P.: OptimalControlProblems.jl: A collection of optimal control problems with ODEs in Julia. Software, version 0.2.2. Accessed September 23, 2026 (2025). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17013180 . https://github.com/control-toolbox/OptimalControlProblems.jl Cumming, B.D., McElwain, D.L.S., Upton, Z.: A mathematical model of wound heal-ing and subsequent scarring. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface 7(42), 19–34 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2008.0536 Chackochan, V.T., Sanguineti, V.: Incomplete information about the partner affects the development of collaborative strategies in joint action. PLOS Computational Biology 15 (12), 1006385 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006385 Dockner, E., Feichtinger, G., Mehlmann, A.: Noncooperative solutions for a differential game model of fishery. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 13 (1), 1–20 (1989) https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1889(89)90008-0 Da-Silva, A.C., Navas, C.A., Ribeiro, P.L.: Dealing with water deficit in atta ant colonies: large ants scout for water while small ants transport it. Biology open 1(9), 103 827–830 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1242/bio.2012703 Facchinei, F., Kanzow, C.: Generalized nash equilibrium problems. Annals of Opera-tions Research 175 (1), 177–211 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-009-0653-x Fridovich-Keil, D., Ratner, E., Peters, L., Dragan, A.D., Tomlin, C.J.: Efficient iterative linear-quadratic approximations for nonlinear multi-player general-sum differential games. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1475–1481. IEEE, Paris, France (2020). https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9197129 . https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.04694 Greenwald, E.E., Baltiansky, L., Feinerman, O.: Individual crop loads provide local control for collective food intake in ant colonies. eLife 7, 31730 (2018) https://doi. org/10.7554/elife.31730 Gersani, M., Brown, J.S., O’Brien, E.E., Maina, G.M., Abramsky, Z.: Tragedy of the commons as a result of root competition. Journal of Ecology 89 (4), 660–669 (2001) https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0022-0477.2001.00609.x Goldberg, D.E., Martina, J.P., Elgersma, K.J., Currie, W.S.: Plant size and compet-itive dynamics along nutrient gradients. The American naturalist 190 (2), 229–243 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1086/692438 González-Olivares, E., González-Yañez, B., Becerra-Klix, R., Ramos-Jiliberto, R.: Multiple stable states in a model based on predator-induced defenses. Ecological Complexity 32 , 111–120 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecocom.2017.10.004 Hamilton, W.D.: Extraordinary sex ratios. Science 156 (3774), 477–488 (1967) https: //doi.org/10.1126/science.156.3774.477 Harper, D.G.C.: Competitive foraging in mallards: “ideal free’ ducks. Animal Behaviour 30 (2), 575–584 (1982) https://doi.org/10.1016/s0003-3472(82)80071-7 Hiltunen, T., Becks, L.: Consumer co-evolution as an important component of the eco-evolutionary feedback. Nature Communications 5(1), 5226 (2014) https://doi. org/10.1038/ncomms6226 Hummert, S., Bohl, K., Basanta, D., Deutsch, A., Werner, S., Theißen, G., Schroeter, A., Schuster, S.: Evolutionary game theory: cells as players. Molecular BioSystems 

10 (12), 3044–3065 (2014) https://doi.org/10.1039/c3mb70602h Hamelin, F.M., Lewis, M.A.: A differential game theoretical analysis of mechanistic models for territoriality. Journal of Mathematical Biology 61 (5), 665–694 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-009-0316-1 Ilango, A., Shumake, J., Wetzel, W., Scheich, H., Ohl, F.W.: The role of dopamine in the context of aversive stimuli with particular reference to acoustically signaled 104 avoidance learning. Frontiers in Neuroscience 6, 132 (2012) https://doi.org/10. 3389/fnins.2012.00132 Klipp, E., Heinrich, R., Holzhütter, H.-G.: Prediction of temporal gene expression. metabolic opimization by re-distribution of enzyme activities. European Journal of Biochemistry 269 (22), 5406–5413 (2002) https://doi.org/10.1046/J.1432-1033. 2002.03223.X Kanzow, C., Steck, D.: Augmented lagrangian methods for the solution of generalized nash equilibrium problems. SIAM Journal on Optimization 26 (4), 2034–2058 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1137/16M1068256 Le Cleac’h, S., Schwager, M., Manchester, Z.: ALGAMES: A fast augmented lagrangian solver for constrained dynamic games. Autonomous Robots 46 (1), 201–215 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-021-10024-7 Low, C., Ellner, S.P., Holden, M.H.: Optimal control and cold war dynamics between plant and herbivore. The American Naturalist 182 (2), 25–39 (2013) https://doi. org/10.1086/670810 Leloup, J.-C., Goldbeter, A.: A model for circadian rhythms in Drosophila incorporat-ing the formation of a complex between the PER and TIM proteins. Journal of Bio-logical Rhythms 13 (1), 70–87 (1998) https://doi.org/10.1177/074873098128999934 Lanctot, M., Lockhart, E., Lespiau, J.-B., Zambaldi, V., Upadhyay, S., Pérolat, J., Srinivasan, S., Timbers, F., Tuyls, K., Omidshafiei, S., et al.: OpenSpiel: A Framework for Reinforcement Learning in Games. arXiv:1908.09453 (2019). https: //arxiv.org/abs/1908.09453 Lehtonen, J., Schwanz, L.E.: Mate limitation and sex ratio evolution. Royal Society open science 5(2), 171135 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171135 Molloy, T.L., Charaja, J.I., Hohmann, S., Perez, T.: Inverse Optimal Control and Inverse Noncooperative Dynamic Game Theory. Springer, Cham (2022). https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93317-3 McNamara, J., Houston, A., Collins, E.J.: Optimality models in behavioral biology. Siam Review 43 (3), 413–466 (2001) https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144500385263 Molloy, T.L., Inga, J., Flad, M., Ford, J.J., Perez, T., Hohmann, S.: Inverse open-loop noncooperative differential games and inverse optimal control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 65 (2), 897–904 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1109/TAC.2019. 2921835 Maynard Smith, J.: Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1982). https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511806292 105 Maynard Smith, J., Price, G.R.: The logic of animal conflict. Nature 246 (5427), 15–18 (1973) https://doi.org/10.1038/246015a0 Nudelman, E., Wortman, J., Shoham, Y., Leyton-Brown, K.: Run the GAMUT: A comprehensive approach to evaluating game-theoretic algorithms. In: Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2004. AAMAS 2004., pp. 880–887. IEEE Computer Society, New York, NY, USA (2004). https://doi.org/10.1109/AAMAS.2004.238 O’Brien, E.E., Brown, J.S., Moll, J.D.: Roots in space: a spatially explicit model for below-ground competition in plants. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274 (1612), 929–935 (2007) https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2006.0113 Oyarzún, D., Ingalls, B., Middleton, R., Kalamatianos, D.: Optimal metabolic path-way activation. Elsevier BV (2008). https://doi.org/10.3182/20080706-5-kr-1001. 02130 . https://arxiv.org/abs/0801.2447 Oyarzún, D., Ingalls, B., Middleton, R., Kalamatianos, D.: Sequential activation of metabolic pathways: a dynamic optimization approach. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 71 (8), 1851–1872 (2009) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-009-9427-5 Parker, G.A., Maynard Smith, J.: Optimality theory in evolutionary biology. Nature 

348 (6296), 27–33 (1990) https://doi.org/10.1038/348027a0 Patterson, M.A., Rao, A.V.: GPOPS-II: A MATLAB software for solving multiple-phase optimal control problems using hp-adaptive Gaussian quadrature collocation methods and sparse nonlinear programming. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 41 (1), 1–1137 (2014) https://doi.org/10.1145/2558904 Paterson, S., Vogwill, T., Buckling, A., Benmayor, R., Spiers, A., Thomson, N., Quail, M., Smith, F., Walker, D., Libberton, B., et al. : Antagonistic coevolution accelerates molecular evolution. Nature 464 (7286), 275–278 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature08798 Revilla, T.A., Křivan, V.: Pollinator foraging adaptation and coexistence of compet-ing plants. PloS one 11 (8), 0160076 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0160076 Rao, F., Messan, M.R., Marquez, A., Smith, N., Kang, Y.: Nutritional Regula-tion Influencing Colony Dynamics and Task Allocations in Social Insect Colonies. Informa UK Limited (2020). https://doi.org/10.1080/17513758.2020.1786859 .https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.03432 Rosenzweig, M.L.: Paradox of enrichment: destabilization of exploitation ecosystems in ecological time. Science 171 (3969), 385–387 (1971) https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.171.3969.385 106 Sager, S.: A benchmark library of mixed-integer optimal control problems. In: Lee, J., Leyffer, S. (eds.) Mixed Integer Nonlinear Programming, pp. 631–670. Springer, New York, NY (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1927-3_22 SciML: Corleone.jl: Optimal Control meets Scientific Machine Learning. Soft-ware repository, accessed September 23, 2026 (n.d.). https://github.com/SciML/ Corleone.jl Santra, M., Farrell, D.W., Dill, K.A.: Bacterial proteostasis balances energy and chap-erone utilization efficiently. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 114 (13), 2654–2661 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1620646114 Stephens, D.W., Krebs, J.R.: Foraging Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1986). https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvs32s6b Schilling, M., Konen, K., Ohl, F.W., Korthals, T.: Decentralized deep reinforce-ment learning for a distributed and adaptive locomotion controller of a hexapod robot. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems, pp. 5335–5342. IEEE, Las Vegas, NV, USA (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/ IROS45743.2020.9341754 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11164 Schuster, S., Kreft, J.-U., Schroeter, A., Pfeiffer, T.: Use of game-theoretical methods in biochemistry and biophysics. Journal of Biological Physics 34 (1–2), 1–17 (2008) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10867-008-9101-4 Sun, S., Leshowitz, M.I., Rychtář, J.: The signalling game between plants and pollinators. Scientific Reports 8(1), 6686 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41598-018-24779-0 Schilling, M., Ritter, H., Ohl, F.W.: From crystallized adaptivity to fluid adaptivity in deep reinforcement learning – insights from biological systems on adaptive flexibility. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp. 1472–1478. IEEE, Bari, Italy (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2019.8914302 . https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.05348 Slaby, O., Sager, S., Shaik, O.S., Kummer, U., Lebiedz, D.: Optimal control of self-organized dynamics in cellular signal transduction. Mathematical and Computer Modelling of Dynamical Systems 13 (5), 487–502 (2007) https://doi.org/10.1080/ 13873950701243969 Suri, R.: Optimal harvesting strategies for fisheries: A differential equations approach. PhD thesis, Massey University (2008). Two-player differential game formulated on p. 168. https://mro.massey.ac.nz/server/api/core/bitstreams/ 6dc7ad99-1d4f-4b56-a43e-b4965827292f/content Tam, Z.Y., Gruber, J., Halliwell, B., Gunawan, R.: Context-dependent role of 107 mitochondrial fusion-fission in clonal expansion of mtdna mutations. PLoS com-putational biology 11 (5), 1004183 (2015) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1004183 Tu, B.P., Kudlicki, A., Rowicka, M., McKnight, S.L.: Logic of the yeast metabolic cycle: temporal compartmentalization of cellular processes. Science 310 (5751), 1152–1158 (2005) https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1120499 Tsoi, R., Wu, F., Zhang, C., Bewick, S., Karig, D., You, L.: Metabolic division of labor in microbial systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 115 (10), 2526–2531 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1716888115 Verschueren, R., Frison, G., Kouzoupis, D., Frey, J., Duijkeren, N., Zanelli, A., Novoselnik, B., Albin, T., Quirynen, R., Diehl, M.: acados—a modular open-source framework for fast embedded optimal control. Mathematical Programming Computation 14 (1), 147–183 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1007/s12532-021-00208-8 Wilson, H.R., Cowan, J.D.: Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized popu-lations of model neurons. Biophysical Journal 12 (1), 1–24 (1972) https://doi.org/ 10.1016/S0006-3495(72)86068-5 Witzig, M., Grimm, A., Schmitt, K., Lejri, I., Frank, S., Brown, S.A., Eckert, A.: Clock-controlled mitochondrial dynamics correlates with cyclic pregnenolone synthesis. Cells 9(10), 2323 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9102323 Xavier, J.B., Foster, K.R.: Cooperation and conflict in microbial biofilms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104 (3), 876– 881 (2007) https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0607651104 Yoshida, T., Ellner, S.P., Jones, L.E., Bohannan, B.J.M., Lenski, R.E., Hairston, J. Nelson G.: Cryptic population dynamics: Rapid evolution masks trophic interac-tions. PLoS Biology 5(9), 235 (2007) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0050235 Zhu, E.L., Borrelli, F.: A sequential quadratic programming approach to the solution of open-loop generalized nash equilibria. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 3211–3217. IEEE, London, United Kingdom (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10160799 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2203. 16478 Zhou, Q.S., Gao, Y., Hou, J.M., Wang, T., Tang, L.: Preference of carbon absorption determines the competitive ability of algae along atmospheric CO2 concentration. Ecology and Evolution 12 (7), 9079 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.9079 108