Title: SwarmCoDe: A Scalable Co-Design Framework for Heterogeneous Robot Swarms via Dynamic Speciation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26240v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:54:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# SwarmCoDe: A Scalable Co-Design Framework for Heterogeneous Robot Swarms via Dynamic Speciation 

Andrew Wilhelm 1∗ and Josie Hughes 1

Abstract — Robot swarms offer inherent robustness and the capacity to execute complex, collaborative tasks surpassing the capabilities of single-agent systems. Co-designing these systems is critical, as marginal improvements in individual performance or unit cost compound significantly at scale. However, under traditional frameworks, this scale renders co-design intractable due to exponentially large, non-intuitive design spaces. To address this, we propose SwarmCoDe, a novel Collaborative Co-Evolutionary Algorithm (CCEA) that utilizes dynamic spe-ciation to automatically scale swarm heterogeneity to match task complexity. Inspired by biological signaling mechanisms for inter-species cooperation, the algorithm uses evolved genetic tags and a selectivity gene to facilitate the emergent identifi-cation of symbiotically beneficial partners without predefined species boundaries. Additionally, an evolved dominance gene dictates the relative swarm composition, decoupling the physical swarm size from the evolutionary population. We apply Swarm-CoDe to simultaneously optimize task planning and hardware morphology under fabrication budgets, successfully evolving specialized swarms of up to 200 agents – four times the size of the evolutionary population. This framework provides a scalable, computationally viable pathway for the holistic co-design of large-scale, heterogeneous robot swarms. 

I. INTRODUCTION Swarm robotics is a critical direction for the future of autonomous systems, enabling capabilities that far exceed those of single- or multi-agent platforms [1]. By leverag-ing emergent behavior, robotic swarms can collaboratively accomplish large-scale, complex tasks that would otherwise be intractable. Furthermore, swarms are inherently robust; losing a member of the swarm does not drastically affect the performance of the entire swarm. Consequently, the optimization of swarm robotic systems via co-design (i.e., the concurrent design across multiple domains such as morphology, control, component selection, task planning, etc.) holds significant potential, although it has been a largely under-researched area [2]. At the scale of hundreds or thousands of agents, even minor improvements to individual robot performance compound into massive gains in collective efficiency. In addition, when fabricating an extensive number of robots, minimizing per-unit cost and build time becomes paramount. While a marginal reduction in fabrication time or component cost may seem inconse-quential for a single robot, it is critically important for the economic feasibility of large-scale swarm deployments. However, the very scale that provides robot swarms with their inherent advantages also makes them difficult to design.  

> ∗Correspondence to

andrew.wilhelm@epfl.ch  

> 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
> Fig. 1. Overview of the SwarmCoDe algorithm that dynamically determines species for the co-design of heterogeneous robot swarms. Genetic tags and a selectivity gene are used to determine partners for evaluations to complete the collaborative task. A relative dominance gene determines the swarm composition, enabling our technique to scale to swarm sizes of 200 robots, four times the number of individuals in the evolutionary population.

Beyond the traditional challenges of robot design (multi-domain constraints, mixed continuous and discrete variables, and multi-objective optimization [3], [4]), swarm co-design has its own additional challenges. The design space is extremely non-intuitive, as it is not clear how certain changes in one robot will propagate through the swarm and affect emergent collaboration. Moreover, the dimensionality of the design space itself scales exponentially with the size of the swarm. These additional challenges to swarm co-design motivate the need for swarm-specific co-design algorithms as opposed to naïvely applying single or multi-robot design algorithms to these systems. In this paper, we propose SwarmCoDe, a novel, species-based Collaborative Co-Evolutionary Algorithm (CCEA) ex-plicitly formulated for robot swarm co-design (Figure 1). Our approach emergently finds unique robot “species”, distinct robot designs that specialize in different collaborative roles within the swarm. To achieve this, we use a speciation tag (a binary vector inspired by selective biological features such as the bright coloration of flowers attracting pollinators) to quantify genetic drift and facilitate the identification of compatible partners for co-evolution. Additionally, we use a relative dominance gene that encodes the ratio an individ-ual should compose in the robot swarm. By stochastically 

> arXiv:2603.26240v1 [cs.RO] 27 Mar 2026

sampling swarm members in proportion to their evolved dominance genes, our algorithm can efficiently scale to swarms that are larger than the number of individuals in our evolutionary pool. As our primary focus is swarm co-design, we also apply constraints on the design process to generate designs that optimize for fabrication cost and difficulty. We demonstrate that our SwarmCoDe algorithm can co-design robot swarms composed of up to 200 agents for col-laborative foraging tasks, optimizing behavior and hardware (morphology and component selection). Our results show that the algorithm is highly adaptable to problem complex-ity: simpler tasks naturally yield a single robot species (a homogeneous swarm), while more complex tasks drive the emergence of multiple species (a heterogeneous swarm). We also observe this dynamic speciation when accounting for the overhead cost of fabricating multiple types of robots under a strict budget, where a larger budget allows for more complex and varied designs while a restrictive budget necessitates a homogeneous “generalist” swarm. By leveraging the relative dominance gene, we demonstrate that our algorithm scales to swarm sizes four times larger than the number of individuals in the evolutionary population, effectively enabling the co-design of previously intractable large-scale swarm systems. II. RELATED WORKS 

A. Robot Co-Design 

Developing optimal robotic systems requires a co-design approach that optimizes performance objectives while min-imizing resource consumption under multi-domain con-straints, a task complicated by subtle interdependencies across various engineering domains. Existing literature ad-dresses single-agent co-design through approaches including heuristics [5], grammars [6], gradient-based methods [7], linear programming [8], and constraint programming [9]. However, research into the co-design of multi-agent and swarm systems remains limited. Analytical methods such as integer programming [10], monotone co-design prob-lems [11], or constraint programming [12] provide provable guarantees on the optimality of solutions. These frameworks have designed multi-agent transport teams, vehicle trans-portation fleets, and quadcopter fleets, respectively. However, to maintain computational tractability, these methods fre-quently rely on modeling approximations such as lineariza-tion or monotonization. Because they do not utilize simula-tion, these formula-based approaches struggle to capture the complex interactions characteristic of swarm systems such as collision dynamics and emergent collaborative behaviors. 

B. Genetic Algorithms for Swarm Systems 

Evolutionary methods offer an alternative to analytical modeling by using simulation to evaluate fitness and guide the optimization. Most existing literature on genetic algo-rithms for swarm systems focuses on optimizing controllers for either homogeneous swarms (all agents identical, using the same controller) [13], [14] or heterogeneous swarms (agents utilize one or several controllers) [15], [16], [17]. The primary advantage of simulation-based genetic algo-rithms is their ability to capture complex interactions and emergent behaviors between agents and their environment. However, this capability comes at the cost of computational tractability; evaluating the fitness function is typically the most computationally demanding phase of the algorithm. Consequently, modern frameworks utilizing hardware accel-eration and parallelization are increasingly required to ad-dress this bottleneck. Furthermore, because these algorithms lack mathematical guarantees, they may converge on locally optimal solutions instead of globally optimal ones. 

C. Cooperative Co-Evolution and Dynamic Speciation 

To optimize multi-agent systems where distinct specializa-tions are desired, Cooperative Co-Evolutionary Algorithms (CCEAs) are frequently employed. CCEAs evolve multi-ple subpopulations, where different subpopulations represent different variables, effectively converting an N-dimensional problem into N 1-dimensional problems [18]. Traditional CCEA frameworks assume a fixed number of species de-termined a priori . In this paradigm, it is typically assumed that a single species corresponds directly to an agent in the swarm. Consequently, these algorithms require the number of individuals in the evolutionary population to exceed the number of agents in the actual swarm. Traditional algorithms also enforce strict genetic isolation to prevent destructive recombination between species, ensuring that offspring are viable and specializations remain stable. Modern CCEAs address these limitations using interaction learning to determine how variables relate to each other during the optimization run [19]. Instead of relying on pre-defined species counts, the algorithms automatically adjust the number of species based on thresholds, such as group-ing tightly linked variables within the same species [20]. Additionally, to share information between different sub-problems, modern CCEAs employ methods like migration or interspecies crossover to mix genetic material between species [19]. While some literature leverages behavior or trait identification for speciation [20], these methods either demand significant manual tuning or introduce substantial algorithmic complexity. In contrast, our approach utilizes speciation tags to achieve speciation seamlessly. Similarly, speciation algorithms [21] such as NEAT [22] perform dynamic speciation to promote solution diversity for multi-objective problems. In these frameworks, different species do not correspond to different optimization variables; instead, they correspond to different exploration regions of the search space. In this paper, we adapt the dynamic speciation method from NEAT within a CCEA framework to provide dynamic speciation and stabilize cooperative niches without imposing 

a priori species boundaries. This allows the algorithm to organically discover both the number of distinct robot types and their respective morphologies and task-planning policies, driven entirely by collaborative simulation rather than pre-defined analytical methods. Furthermore, we decouple the evolutionary population structure from the deployed swarm composition by introducing a dominance gene (a continuous value between 0 and 1) within the genome of each individual that determines its relative frequency within the swarm. The final swarm is then populated through random sampling weighted by these dominance values. III. METHODS 

A. The Algorithm 

SwarmCoDe is a bio-inspired CCEA that dynamically allocates and evolves species populations to occupy special-ized niches and maximize collective fitness. This architecture employs a multi-level selection pressure: at the inter-species level, species compete for population slots (offspring allo-cation) based on their total adjusted fitness, while at the intra-species level, individuals compete for reproduction via tournament selection. Crucially, these competitive dynamics are balanced by a collaborative requirement, as individuals must form effective partnerships across species to complete shared retrieval tasks and maximize their fitness scores. This dual dynamic of competition for optimization resources and collaboration for task execution drives speciation and yields emergent results without hard-coded heuristics. A single generation proceeds as follows. First, the popu-lation undergoes dynamic speciation, where species are as-signed and established. Next, individuals undergo evaluation, determining their partner species and assessing the marginal contribution they provide to the swarm. Finally, based on the performance of individuals and the collective performance of their species, the next generation of offspring is determined. We elaborate on each of these steps in the following sections. 

1) Genome Structure: To facilitate this co-evolution, each individual possesses a heterogeneous genome encoding algo-rithm routing parameters, task-planning control logic, and hardware configuration. The specific components of the genome are outlined in Table I.                                

> Component Type Domain Phenotypic Expression
> Tag Binary {0,1}LGenetic distance for partner se-lection Selectivity Float [0 ,1] Similarity threshold for partners Dominance Float [0 ,1] Swarm sampling probability BT Opcodes Int[] [0 ,13] Behavior tree encoding Radius Float [Rmin , R max ]Size and carrying capacity HW Tiers Categ. {1,2,3}Chassis, battery, and motor tiers End Effector Categ. {0,1}Suction vs. pincher hardware TABLE I GENOME STRUCTURE AND PARAMETER BOUNDS

2) Dynamic Speciation: First, individuals in the popula-tion must be assigned to species. This is done in a manner similar to the species assignment in NEAT. A prototype representing the species is identified as the individual closest to the previous generation’s prototype. Then, the remaining individuals are iterated through to find their closest prototype. If the genetic distance between the closest prototype and the individual exceeds a speciation threshold δ, the individual establishes a new species. Otherwise, it becomes a member of that prototype’s species. The genetic compatibility distance D between two genomes is calculated as a weighted sum of distance metrics across gene components. Specifically, it is defined as: 

D = wtag dtag +whw dhw +wBT dBT +wtool dtool +wsize dsize 

(1) Here, dtag = ( H/L )γ , where H is the Hamming distance between tag bitstrings, L is the tag length, and γ is a scaling exponent. The term dhw represents the normalized Euclidean distance in the continuous hardware space, excluding the radius and tool parameters. The behavior tree (BT) difference 

dBT is the fraction of differing opcodes within the behavior tree array. The morphological differences are captured by 

dtool ∈ { 0, 1}, which acts as a binary penalty for differing end effectors, and dsize , the normalized absolute difference in chassis radius. The corresponding weighting coefficients are defined in Table II. 

Component Symbol Distance Metric ( dx)

Tag wtag (H/L )γ

Hardware whw Normalized Euclidean distance Control (BT) wBT Fraction of differing opcodes Tool wtool Binary difference ( 0 or 1)Size wsize Normalized ∆ radius 

> TABLE II DISTANCE METRICS FOR COMPUTING GENETIC COMPATIBILITY

3) Evaluation and Fitness: During evaluation, every in-dividual in the population is assessed in turn, see Figure 2. An individual selects its partners using its genetic tag, a set of binary values of length L in its genome. The distance between the focal individual’s tags and the prototype tag of each other species is computed. Each individual possesses an evolved selectivity gene with a value between 0 and 1, which defines the maximum allowable tag distance for a species to be considered a partner. If the distance between tags is less than this selectivity threshold, the species becomes a partner. Decoupling partner collaboration from overall genetic distance allows species that are genetically similar to still fulfill different niches on a team. This mechanism mimics nature, where species utilize specific markers to identify potential partners. Finally, for each species identified as a partner, an elite representative is randomly chosen. To determine the marginal contribution of an individual to the swarm’s fitness, we conduct two sets of evaluation trials: one with the focal individual and one without. Swarm composition is determined via random sampling. First, the focal individual and each partner species are guaranteed at least one representative in the swarm. The remaining swarm slots are filled using clones of the focal individual or the selected species elites, utilizing their respective dominance genes as relative selection probabilities. Dominance is an evolved continuous value between 0 and 1 dictating the individual’s desired representation ratio within the swarm. This dominance gene allows the algorithm to scale to sce-narios where the number of individuals in the evolutionary population is less than the number of agents in the physical swarm, particularly useful for swarm co-design where agents Fig. 2. Evaluation pipeline for calculating marginal contribution. Swarms are stochastically assembled using the evolved dominance gene to determine swarm composition ratios. By comparing the performance of a swarm containing the focal individual against a baseline swarm where that individual is replaced by partner elites in an identical environment, the algorithm determines the true fitness of the focal individual. 

number in the hundreds or thousands. To reduce fitness score variance, the mean of several evaluation trials is calculated using the identical swarm composition across randomly gen-erated environments. This averaging mitigates fitness noise from stochastic initial conditions. A second set of baseline trials is conducted under identi-cal environmental conditions but with the focal individual removed. To maintain a consistent swarm size, the slots previously occupied by the focal individual are repopulated through random sampling of the same elite representatives, again using their dominance genes as relative probabilities. The marginal contribution Fmarginal is calculated by taking the difference between these sets of evaluations 

Fmarginal = Ff ocal − Fbaseline . In this way, the isolated contribution of an individual can be determined. We use a gated fitness to then assign the focal individual its fitness score. If the marginal contribution is positive, then the fitness score remains unchanged. Otherwise, the fitness score is penalized by multiplying by a scalar Pmarginal < 1.

4) Evolutionary Operators: These operators are used to determine the population and genetic material for the subse-quent generation. 

Selection: We utilize per-species elitism to preserve the individuals with the highest fitness scores in each species across generations. The top N elites are preserved following the formula 

N = max(1 , min( E, (f loor (population _size/ 5)+1)) . The floor of 1 guarantees at least the best member of a species survives, while the second term strictly limits elite carryover. This prevents large species from completely dominating the population and preserves slots for subsequent exploration. 

Mating: Species are assigned an offspring quota propor-tional to their total adjusted fitness, rewarding successful species with higher representation. Available population slots are allocated proportionately to these adjusted fitness values. To fulfill these quotas, parents are selected via tournament selection. Generally, mating is restricted to individuals within the same species. The first parent is selected through a tournament within the target species. A second tournament then identifies a potential partner; however, this individual is only accepted if the genetic distance between the two parents remains below the threshold δ. If this threshold is violated, the second tournament is repeated for up to 5 attempts. In cases where a compatible intra-species partner cannot be found after these attempts, a global tournament is conducted to facilitate inter-species mating. Following selection, mating occurs. If parents belong to the same species, there is a 70% probability of crossover and a 30% probability of cloning the first parent. If species differ, the crossover probability is reduced to 2.5%. 

Mutations: Every generated offspring undergoes mutation to maintain genetic diversity and facilitate exploration of the design space. Specific mutation operators tailored to the control and hardware segments of the genome are detailed in Sections III-B.1 and III-B.2, respectively. 

B. Co-Design of Robot Swarms 

We deploy SwarmCoDe for the co-design of robot swarms, concurrently optimizing both task-planning policies and hardware morphology. The swarm is tasked with foraging for packages of varying weights and sizes dispersed through-out the environment. Successful retrieval of a single-agent package requires a robot to possess sufficient surplus torque and a compatible chassis diameter, as well as the specific end effector (suction or pincher) required by the payload. In contrast, collaborative packages necessitate multi-agent coordination, requiring each robot to move to a compatible handhold for its specific end effector to enable collective transport. This high-level task ensures that the dual dynamic of competition for optimization resources and collaboration for task execution drives speciation, yielding emergent, col-lective results without the use of hard-coded heuristics. 

1) Planning: We utilize a behavior tree to encode the task planning policy. Within the genome, this is encoded as an array of instructions, where each instruction consists of an opcode and a jump index. These opcodes are strictly catego-rized into three functional types: control flow, environmental conditions (sensing), and physical actions. The instruction set is detailed in Table III. Standard behavior trees rely on recursive node traversal, which is highly inefficient for vectorized GPU execution. To address this, we encode the tree as a flattened array where control flow is managed strictly through opcodes and jump indices. To ensure the static array shapes required by the JAX simulation environment, all behavior tree arrays are padded to a uniform maximum length using NOP opcodes. At the beginning of each simulation tick, an interpreter traverses this array sequentially. Action and condition nodes return standard state flags (SUCCESS, FAILURE, or RUNNING). Physical locomotion actions, such as navigating toward a target, are executed via an underlying PD controller. Control nodes ( SEQ , SEL ) evaluate these flags; if a SEQ child fails or a SEL child succeeds, the interpreter utilizes the pre-computed jump index to immediately bypass the remaining subtree. The END opcode explicitly signals the termination boundary of these subtrees. To bootstrap the optimization, initial populations are seeded with a random, pre-made behavior tree template. Mutations are 95% point mutations and 5% subtree re-placements, and jump indices are recomputed following any genetic alteration.                   

> Opcode Name
> 0SEQ (Sequence) 1SEL (Selector) 2COND_HAS_PACKAGE
> 3COND_NEAR_PACKAGE
> 4COND_NEAR_BASE
> 5COND_AM_I_STUCK
> Opcode Name
> 6ACT_MOVE_TO_PACK
> 7ACT_MOVE_TO_BASE
> 8ACT_RANDOM_WALK
> 9ACT_PICK_UP
> 10 ACT_DROP
> 11 ACT_MOVE_TO_RANDOM_PACK
> 12 END
> 13 NOP

TABLE III OPCODES USED FOR THE BEHAVIOR TREE REPRESENTATION 

2) Hardware Design: The hardware design space en-compasses both continuous morphological parameters and discrete categorical components. Specifically, the evolution-ary process optimizes the continuous radius of the robot, which governs its spatial footprint and carrying capacity, alongside motor torque and battery capacity operating points. Categorical genes define the functional hardware configura-tion, including the equipped end effector type and discrete performance tiers for the chassis material, battery, and motor. This structure creates functional trade-offs where premium tiers provide superior structural integrity or energy density but incur higher costs. By evolving these continuous and discrete hardware parameters simultaneously alongside the task-planning policy, the swarm can discover specialized morphological niches that optimize collaborative efficiency. 

C. Simulation Environment and Task Formulation 1) Simulation Environment: We utilize a custom-developed, 2D physics engine optimized for GPU acceler-ation using vectorized parallel updates in JAX. The engine employs semi-implicit Euler integration and resolves elastic collisions between robots and static obstacles. 

2) Fitness Function: The raw fitness is calculated: 

Fraw = max ( ( Sdelivery + Scollab + Spickup + Senergy 

+ Sproximity + Scloseness ) × Pactivity , 0.1)  

> •

Pactivity is an inactivity penalty. If zero packages are retrieved: Pactivity = 0 .5. Otherwise, Pactivity = 1 .0 

> •

Sdelivery = Ndelivered ×Wdelivery rewards the success-ful retrieval of packages back to the base  

> •

Scollab = (P Gdelivered ) × Wdelivery +

Ncollab _delivered × Wcollab _bonus applies a bonus for collaborative packages, where P Gdelivered is the total required grip points across delivered collaborative packages  

> •

Spickup = ( Npicked +Ncollab _picked )×Wpickup provides a minor reward for initial acquisition to guide early-stage evolution  

> •

Senergy = Eavg _f inal × Wenergy is a small boost to encourage robots to conserve energy  

> •

Sproximity = mean (Score i) × Wproximity guides robots already holding a package towards base, where 

Score i = 10 1+0 .1×dbase if holding and 0 otherwise for each robot i in the swarm  

> •

Scloseness = mean (Pi) × Wcloseness rewards interme-diate progress for packages moved but not delivered, where Pi = Dinitial −Df inal  

> Dinitial

for robot i in the swarm Aggregate hardware costs are regulated by a swarm-level budget constraint Cbudget . We enforce this using a soft penalty Pbudget :

Pbudget =

(

max(0 .05 , e −λ∆C ) if ∆C > 01 otherwise where ∆C = Cswarm −Cbudget represents the budget excess, and λ is a decay coefficient that dictates the strictness of the soft penalty for exceeding Cbudget . The soft penalty has a slower decrease (unlike a hard penalty that immediately penalizes above the threshold) that helps guide the evolution towards swarm designs that satisfy the budget constraint. The final fitness score is F = Fraw × Pbudget , smoothed with an EMA filter (decay rate α). 

D. Implementation Details and Hyperparameters 

We detail the specific hyperparameters utilized during our experimental evaluation in Table IV.                               

> Category Symbol Value
> Distance Weights wtag , w hw , w BT 1.0,0.5,0.3
> wtool , w size 0.35 ,0.7
> Fitness Weights Wdelivery , W collab _bonus 100 .0,50 .0
> Wpickup , W energy 1.0,0.03
> Wproximity , W closeness 1.0,30 .0
> Constants Speciation Threshold δ0.4
> Tag Exponent γ2.0
> Budget Penalty Decay λ0.001
> Marginal Penalty Pmarginal 0.25
> EMA Decay α0.6

TABLE IV HYPERPARAMETERS AND EMPIRICAL CONSTANTS USED IN EVALUATION 

IV. RESULTS All evaluations were conducted on a desktop computer equipped with a 4.3 GHz 32-thread CPU, 32GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5090 (32GB VRAM). Fig. 3. The simulation environment with 20 agents and 16 individual packages. Robots are tasked with retrieving packages and returning them to the base. Robots with pincher end effectors (green and purple) can lift square packages while robots with suction end effectors (red and blue) can lift circle packages. Darker packages are heavier, and located closer to the base; lighter packages are farther away. 

A. Emergent Speciation 

We demonstrate the emergent speciation capabilities of the SwarmCoDe algorithm across three environments: one requiring only pincher end effectors, one requiring a mix of pincher and suction end effectors, and one requiring a mix of both where package weights decrease as a function of distance from the base. The swarms consisted of 20 agents optimized via an evolutionary population of 50 individuals. These baseline trials omitted budget and fabrication con-straints and ran for 500 generations, taking approximately 50 minutes to run. Figure 3 provides an overview of the simulation environment. Speciation results (Figure 4) show the emergence of one, two, and four distinct species for the respective environmental complexities. This dynamically scaled heterogeneity confirms that the algorithm introduces specialized species only when the introduction of a special-ized niche yields a higher fitness evaluation. Analysis of the evolved morphological traits reveals dis-tinct physical specializations tailored to the specific task constraints. For example, in the four-niche scenario, the algorithm evolved large, high-torque suction and pincher robots to transport heavy payloads near the base, alongside compact, energy-efficient variants optimized for retrieving distant, lightweight packages. Fig. 5 (Left and Center) depict the temporal evolution of species composition for the gen-eral population and the elite team for this scenario. Initial exploration drives high inter-species competition, causing numerous unviable species to become extinct within the first 20 generations. The population distribution subsequently sta-bilizes into cooperative niches, punctuated by the occasional emergence or extinction of species. Correlating with these population dynamics, the elite team’s fitness scores (Fig. 5, Right) exhibit an overall upward trend, ultimately converging on a highly optimized four-species heterogeneous swarm. However, the fitness trajectory shows significant variance per generation as the algorithm explores various inter-species                                            

> Budget Best Fitness Team Cost Total Deliveries Individ. Package Deliveries Collab. Package Deliveries Avg. Energy Used # of Species
> 2500 125.2 2500 44053.8 13000 154.1 3000 10 8241.0 24000 182.9 3800 10 10 067.6 25000 211.6 5100 11 10 136.4 36000 224.7 6110 12 11 146.9 38000 244.4 7880 11 9242.4 4
> TABLE V EVOLUTIONARY RESULTS UNDER DIFFERENT BUDGET CONSTRAINTS

partner combinations. This fluctuation results from the high-dimensional search for compatible behaviors and morpholo-gies, alongside the continuous turnover of species as new candidates emerge and existing lineages go extinct. 

B. Budget Constraints and Return on Investment 

To investigate the co-design framework under increased task complexity and hardware cost constraints, we introduced collaborative packages and enforced fabrication cost budgets across a secondary set of trials. The collaborative packages require multi-agent coordination, increasing the difficulty of emergent behavior optimization. Simultaneously, a baseline fabrication penalty of $500 was applied for each unique species introduced to evaluate the algorithm’s ability to satisfy hardware cost constraints. This explicitly introduces a trade-off between the performance benefits of morphological specialization and the prohibitive fabrication costs associated with highly heterogeneous swarms. The task required mixed end effectors for individual and collaborative packages with package weights decreasing farther from the base. Optimiza-tion was executed over 500 generations with 20 swarm agents and an expanded evolutionary population of 100 individuals. Table V summarizes the performance degradation under increasingly tight budget constraints. Restricting the budget reduces the swarm fitness and number of packages delivered. To satisfy these lower cost constraints, the algorithm reduces swarm heterogeneity, favoring generalist species over costly specialized niches. This demonstrates the ability of our algorithm to adapt to varying cost constraints, adjusting the robot morphology and the swarm complexity. To further evaluate cost efficiency, we reformulated the objective function, dividing the total fitness by total swarm cost. This return on investment (ROI) optimization seeks the optimal balance between delivered utility and fabrication expenditure. Figure 6 tracks the ROI fitness convergence, while Figure 7 details the specific morphological traits of the resulting highly efficient species. The algorithm identifies an ROI-optimized swarm that has a configuration consisting of four distinct species with a total swarm cost of $5100. 

C. Swarm Scalability 

This section validates the algorithm’s scalability by opti-mizing swarms significantly larger than the evolutionary pop-ulation. Trials simulated a 200-agent swarm optimized with an evolutionary pool of only 50 individuals. The environment contained individual and collaborative packages requiring specific end effectors, with package weights independent of Fig. 4. Emerging species and their morphological niches for increasingly complex scenarios. The SwarmCoDe algorithm adapts to increasingly complex tasks that require one, two, and four unique species to efficiently complete.         

> Fig. 5. Evolutionary dynamics and fitness for the “Two Package Types with Distance-Based Weights” scenario. (Left) The species composition of the evolutionary population over time, where different colors represent distinct species. Early on, many species compete to remain in the population, with many going extinct within the first 20 generations. (Center) The species composition of the best team. As the species adapt and evolve, the best team composition changes, with some species remaining in the best team for several generations while others are never included. (Right) The fitness of the best team per generation. The fitness evolves towards more optimal values over time, but fluctuates as different species emerge and go extinct in the population.
> Fig. 6. The fitness of the best team per generation for the “Return on Investment” scenario. The fitness of the best team evolves towards more optimal values over time, but fluctuates as different species emerge and go extinct in the general population.

distance from the base. Arena dimensions, obstacle density, and package counts were scaled proportionally to support the larger multi-agent system (Figure 8). Optimization of this scaled, 200-agent system required approximately 5 hours of compute time. Figure 9 demonstrates that SwarmCoDe successfully isolates two complementary species capable of executing the large-scale collaborative task. These species emerge rapidly within the first 50 generations and undergo fine-tuning for the remainder of the optimization. By effec-tively leveraging the relative dominance gene, the algorithm robustly scales to swarms four times larger than the evolu-tionary pool, overcoming a primary bottleneck in co-design of large-scale swarm systems.  

> Fig. 7. Emerging species and their morphological niches for the “Return on Investment” scenario.

V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we presented SwarmCoDe, a novel algorithm that utilizes dynamic speciation to co-design heterogeneous robot swarms. By evolving genetic tags and a selectivity gene, our method enables individuals to emergently iden-tify and collaborate with symbiotically beneficial partners. We demonstrated that SwarmCoDe successfully modulates swarm heterogeneity to match task complexity, effectively optimizing morphological traits and task planning under fabrication budget constraints. Furthermore, through the im-plementation of a relative dominance gene, the algorithm robustly scales to swarms up to four times the size of the evolutionary population. For future work, we plan to extend this framework to Fig. 8. The simulation environment with 200 agents, 80 individual packages, and 32 collaborative packages. Robots are tasked with retrieving packages and returning them to the base. Robots must work together to carry certain package types. Darker packages are heavier, and located closer to the base; lighter packages are farther away. 

Fig. 9. Speciation and fitness results for the 200 agent robot swarm with 50 individuals in the evolutionary pool. Using the relative dominance gene, the SwarmCoDe algorithm is able to scale to a swarm size that is four times the size of its evolutionary pool. 

optimize more tightly coupled domains, e.g., a low-level dynamics controller that is directly dependent upon morpho-logical design choices. Additionally, we will investigate the co-design of different sensing capabilities and decentralized communication. Finally, we aim to explore algorithmic tech-niques to reduce per-generation fitness variance during the optimization process. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors utilized generative AI tools (Gemini, Claude, ChatGPT) for code generation and manuscript editing. All AI-generated code was manually verified by the authors to ensure technical accuracy. REFERENCES [1] M. Brambilla, E. Ferrante et al. , “Swarm robotics: a review from the swarm engineering perspective,” Swarm Intelligence , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–41, Mar. 2013. [2] H. Li, H. Wei et al. , “Co-evolution framework of swarm self-assembly robots,” Neurocomputing , vol. 148, pp. 112–121, Jan. 2015. [3] B. Johansson, M. Pettersson, and J. O ¨lvander, “A Component Based Optimization Approach for Modular Robot Design,” in Volume 6: 33rd Design Automation Conference, Parts A and B . Las Vegas, Nevada, USA: ASMEDC, Jan. 2007, pp. 911–920. [4] A. Spielberg, B. Araki et al. , “Functional co-optimization of articulated robots,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . Singapore, Singapore: IEEE, May 2017, pp. 5035–5042. [5] S. Ha, S. Coros et al. , “Computational Design of Robotic De-vices From High-Level Motion Specifications,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1240–1251, Oct. 2018, conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Robotics. [6] A. Zhao, J. Xu et al. , “RoboGrammar: Graph grammar for terrain-optimized robot design,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 39, no. 6, Nov. 2020. [7] A. Spielberg, A. Zhao et al. , “Learning-In-The-Loop Optimization: End-To-End Control And Co-Design Of Soft Robots Through Learned Deep Latent Representations,” Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2019. [8] O. Magnussen, M. Ottestad, and G. Hovland, “Multicopter Design Optimization and Validation,” Modeling, Identification and Control: A Norwegian Research Bulletin , vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 67–79, 2015. [9] A. Wilhelm and N. Napp, “Constraint Programming for Component-Level Robot Design,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , Oct. 2023, pp. 460–466. [10] L. Carlone and C. Pinciroli, “Robot Co-design: Beyond the Monotone Case,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , May 2019, pp. 3024–3030. [11] G. Zardini, N. Lanzetti et al. , “On the Co-Design of AV-Enabled Mobility Systems,” in 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , Sep. 2020, pp. 1–8, arXiv:2003.04739 [eess]. [12] A. Wilhelm and N. Napp, “Monotone Subsystem Decomposition for Efficient Multi-Objective Robot System Design,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation , 2025. [13] J. Gomes, P. Urbano, and A. L. Christensen, “Evolution of swarm robotics systems with novelty search,” Swarm Intelligence , vol. 7, no. 2-3, pp. 115–144, Sep. 2013. [14] E. Ferrante, A. E. Turgut et al. , “Evolution of Self-Organized Task Specialization in Robot Swarms,” PLOS Computational Biology ,vol. 11, no. 8, p. e1004273, Aug. 2015. [15] D. B. D’Ambrosio and K. O. Stanley, “Generative encoding for multiagent learning,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation , ser. GECCO ’08. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Jul. 2008, pp. 819–826. [16] A. E. Eiben, G. S. Nitschke, and M. C. Schut, “Collective Special-ization for Evolutionary Design of a Multi-robot System,” in Swarm Robotics , E. Sahin, W. M. Spears, and A. F. T. Winfield, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, vol. 4433, pp. 189–205, series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. [17] F. Van Diggelen, M. De Carlo et al. , “Emergence of Specialised Collective Behaviors in Evolving Heterogeneous Swarms,” in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature - PPSN XVIII , M. Affenzeller, S. M. Winkler et al. , Eds. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024, vol. 15149, pp. 53–69, series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. [18] M. A. Potter and K. A. D. Jong, “Evolving neural networks with collaborative species,” in Summer Computer Simulation Conference .SOCIETY FOR COMPUTER SIMULATION, ETC, 1995. [19] X. Ma, X. Li et al. , “A Survey on Cooperative Co-Evolutionary Al-gorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 421–441, Jun. 2019. [20] J. Gomes, P. Mariano, and A. L. Christensen, “Dynamic Team Het-erogeneity in Cooperative Coevolutionary Algorithms,” IEEE Trans-actions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 934–948, Dec. 2018. [21] J.-P. Li, X.-D. Li, and A. Wood, “Species based evolutionary algo-rithms for multimodal optimization: A brief review,” in IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation , Jul. 2010, pp. 1–8. [22] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolving Neural Networks through Augmenting Topologies,” Evolutionary Computation , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 99–127, Jun. 2002.