Title: Control of genes by self-organizing multicellular interaction networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26530v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 01:10:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Control of Genes by Self-organizing Multicellular Interaction Networks 

Kyle R. Allison ∗

Unaffiliated, Atlanta, USA; Previously: Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 

Multicellular self-organization drives development in biological organisms, yet a comprehensive the-ory is lacking as basic properties of cells can complicate common approaches. Framing such prop-erties by dynamic graphs led to new theoretical propositions for multicellular self-organization in 

Escherichia coli . Here, corresponding ideas are developed from biologically-general first principles. The resulting perspective could aid both experimental and computational approaches to multicel-lular biology as well as efforts to control and engineer it. 

The following is a unique perspective on multicellu-lar self-organization which may be useful to develop-ing a general theory of the subject. The central ideas originated from exploration [1, 2] of multicellular self-organization in Escherichia coli [3–5], representing a spe-cial case which occurs in a unicellular organism. De-spite this particular origin, these ideas have generality and may be broadly applicable to any organism that em-ploys multicellular self-organization. They can also be arrived at generally—by sparsely drawing key concepts from several subjects, including self-organization, cell bi-ology, and graph theory—rather than solely from E. coli 

cell- and molecular biology. A comprehensive review of multicellular self-organization theory, illustrated via a di-verse collection of biological examples, will likely become more practical in the future. 

Self-organization 

Self-organization characterizes many natural processes spanning physical and temporal scales, from the micro-tubules that structure eukaryotic cells to the hierarchi-cal social networks generated among animals in popula-tions. Self-organization describes when discernible pat-terns arise due to the dynamic interactions between a system’s individual components, rather than being ex-ternally imposed or centrally specified such as by cir-cuit wiring diagrams or architectural blueprints. The “self” indicates organization comes from inside the sys-tem, rather than outside, though all systems have ex-ternal constraints and non-equilibrium thermodynam-ics indicates self-organization requires the internal dis-sipation of energy from external sources [6]. Consid-ering dynamics, the interactions and patterns compris-ing self-organization are semi-stable, differing from self-assembly where they are considered fully stable [7]. Whereas self-assembly spontaneously tends toward struc-tured equilibrium states ( e.g. , nanoparticle assembly), self-organization instead transitions from one semi-stable attractor state to another in a repeatable sequence, per-forming a choreographed dance through dynamic phase  

> ∗kyle.r.allison.phd@gmail.com

space (one might choose to visualize this mathemati-cally as a series of semi-stable basins of attraction that empty one into the next). Empirically, self-organization and self-assembly sometimes appear indistinguishable, but they have incompatible dynamic implications: self-assembled patterns are inevitable and persist in the ab-sence of substantial perturbation; self-organized patterns on the other hand are contingent on circumstances and inevitably disappear. Self-organization is then, more narrowly, when dynamic interactions between compo-nents create repeatable sequences of semi-stable pat-terns. The duration of semi-stable states can vary, for example, morphological transitions in embryogenesis can occur in minutes while other transitions in adult tis-sues can take decades. Such differences in character-istic timescales mean some semi-stable states within a self-organizing sequence have “temporal stability,” in a relative sense if not in a strictly dynamic sense. Semi-stability requires feedback loops, where the change in a variable ( e.g. , a component’s properties) depends on its current state ( e.g. , its current properties). Consistently, positive- and negative feedback loops are common mecha-nisms of self-organization, but they can be obscured when mediated via interactions among multiple components. Emergence, where global properties “emerge” from in-teractions between components rather than strictly from the components’ individual properties, results from self-organization. This idea is at times viewed as more epis-temological than scientific, and whether a given pattern is thought to “emerge” from or be dictated by a system’s components usually reflects the degree of mechanistic un-derstanding. Self-organization’s origin as a concept was philosoph-ical, “Selbstorganisation ” being coined in the 18th-century by Immanuel Kant in his Critique of Judgment 

to distinguish living things from machines. It is then ironic that many of the pioneering scientific theories of self-organization arose form complex non-living systems, like chemical networks and machines [6]. These con-tributions applied concepts from thermodynamics and information theory [8, 9], corresponding to the partic-ular fundamental components of those systems. How-ever, self-organization’s dependence on interactions and their governing frameworks suggests that as a theory be-comes more accurate for one class of self-organization, 

> arXiv:2603.26530v1 [q-bio.MN] 27 Mar 2026

2it becomes less applicable to others arising from differ-ent interactions with incompatible underlying principles. Rather than detract from theoretical approaches, this il-lustrates any theory of self-organization is explicitly cir-cumscribed and that each form of self-organization needs its own theory based on the appropriate underlying prin-ciples. Or as Kant might have put it: in theories of self-organization, it may be necessary to reject the general in order to make room for the particular. 

> Biological Self-organization

Self-organization defines biology at all scales, from the ecological down to the molecular. Protein folding can largely reflect self-assembly of equilibrium states [10], but the dynamic interactions of proteins with one another tend to result from self-organization. At the opposite end of the spectrum, ecological populations can be mod-eled through stable, equilibrium states, but their under-lying adaptive processes are usually recognized as more complicated [11]. The most substantial contributions to biological self-organization perhaps have resulted from studying the internal molecular structures of eukaryotic cell biology [12–14], with microtubules serving as a plat-form for pioneering work [15–17]. Molecules and pro-teins are the fundamental units here, and intracellular examples of molecular self-organization, like cytoskele-tal formation and biomolecular phase separation [18], are largely understood through chemical and thermodynamic principles. On the other hand, the principles of how cells diversely interact are less apparent, and a general theory of multicellular self-organization remains lacking (though specific cases have been ingeniously addressed [19]). This is despite its inherent significance to developmental biol-ogy [20] and proximity to Kant’s original idea. Multicellular self-organization drives development of tissues and organs, and deciphering its molecular events and interactions is a key part of developmental biology [21]. Separately, treating living organisms as “active mat-ter” has enabled the estimation of important mechanical properties of tissues ( e.g. , elasticity or viscosity)[22, 23]. Nevertheless, physics-first models have limited explana-tory power for multicellular self-organization [24], in part because they often omit core cellular properties governing interaction dynamics. Promisingly, synthetic biology and tissue engineering approaches to program development, organoids, self-organization, etc. have been uncovering empirical rules for multicellular self-organization [25–29]. In the future, such engineering approaches would benefit from a constraint-based theoretical framework that en-ables predictions reliable enough to reduce the current need for trial-and-error validations. A theory rendering multicellular self-organization pre-dictable has not yet been developed, though one must necessarily exist. The deep reliability with which sin-gle zygote cells develop into functional, complex mul-ticellular organisms requires such a framework. Cate-gorically, the rules for such a theory must derive from the properties of its fundamental units: cells. A pri-ori and as alluded to above, applying principles from other theories of self-organization ( e.g. , thermodynam-ics or ecological laws) to multicellular self-organization will typically be inadequate: their basic units, properties, and interactions are not equivalent. Of course, certain dynamical features are definitional to self-organization (semi-stability, positive- and negative feedback loops, etc. ), and some parallels between different classes of self-organization are expected. A model for one system may be made to approximate another by tuning its parame-ters, but its differing implications may lead to misinter-pretations. 

> Multicellular Self-organization

Across the tree of life, cells perform diverse and myr-iad behaviors [30], the details of which are essential to the multicellular self-organization of each species and the differences between species. A general theory of mul-ticellular self-organization, or multicellular organization more broadly, must be grounded in properties common to all cells and how such properties influence one an-other’s dynamics. Two such properties are division and adaptation ( i.e. , gene regulation, not the statistical, pop-ulation phenomenon of evolution): cells divide and they adapt ( Fig. 1 ). These traits are non-trivial and tend to distinguish “multicellular” self-organization form other forms. Division means new interacting units (cells) are regularly produced from molecular components at a lower scale. Effectively, this introduces new interacting units (cells) into the system de novo at the scale of interac-tions, posing challenges for equations-based approaches that can already be tricky with a constant number of self-organizing components. Adaptation further compli-cates things: cell properties and interaction rules change with time and context, meaning they are temporally local (i.e. , time-specific) and are expected to differ from one stage to the next. The complications arising from these basic properties of cell biology may help illustrate why a theory of multicellular self-organization has remained a challenge. Fortunately, biology as it exists has supplied a useful constraint. All complex multicellularity known to date results from clonal multicellular self-organization, where the entire or-ganism develops from an individual cell [31]. Arguments based in evolutionary theory have been made for this (e.g. , conflict avoidance), though an independent argu-ment can be made by illustrating the limits on non-clonal organization from a graph-based theory of multicellular-ity [1]. While non-clonal complexity remains possible, clonality covers known complexity and advantageously simplifies self-organization. Despite the difficulties of di-vision and adaptation, clonality entails all new units and interactions result from those already present and not unpredictably from outside. 3division adaptation interaction        

> gene networks external inputs chemical clonal propagation
> mechanical
> FIG. 1. Dynamic graphs for multicellular self-organization. Cells divide (top left). Cells can adapt their identity and behavior by regulating genes using gene networks that inter-pret molecular signals, including inputs from their external environment (top right). Proximal cells can form chemical and mechanical interactions and can modify these interac-tions by adaptation (top right). Self-organization is deter-mined by the specific interactions among a system’s funda-mental units. Cells are the fundamental units of multicellular self-organization. Dynamic graph models, which represent the units and interactions of dynamically changing systems, are a logical framework for multicellular self-organization (and more generally, for any form of self-organization). In this framework, cells are represented as nodes and interactions as edges (bottom). As cells divide, adapt, and interact, new nodes and edges are added to a propagating dynamic graph. Clonality (where all cells descend from a single progenitor cell) simplifies propagation: all changes to nodes and edges result from division, adaptation, and interaction events on preceding graph stages, rather than from unpredictable external effects.

Multicellular self-organization then begins equivalently in all cases. A single cell divides into two connected cells which can interact, even if only briefly. These two must choose whether to remain adhered or to separate, and most organisms have molecular and behavioral mecha-nisms to achieve either option. If they remain together, they must choose how to interact: cooperate, coordinate, communicate, compete, or kill each other; reposition or change shape to accommodate one another; differentiate and adopt complementary roles; or ignore each other. There are many possible decisions, but time is limited because the pair will soon divide and, as four cells, face a similar set of questions in a new context shaped by earlier responses. This iterative cycle—divide, interact, adapt—repeats until cells stop dividing, by choice or cir-cumstance, and reach a state of terminal differentiation or separate. At each stage, cells make decisions framed by their past decisions and neighboring cells, and indi-vidual adaptions can dramatically alter potential future interactions. The contingency of such cycles indicates the princi-ples underlying each interaction-adaptation connection can change and are temporally local. For example, an equation-based model capturing cell-cell adherence at one stage will be superseded or replaced by collective generation of extracellular matrices at a successive stage. Cells both alter and respond to their external environ-ment, meaning cells growing closely in communities in-evitably interact, even if such interactions are not always strictly considered cell-cell signals. How cells adapt to interactions and external inputs is a result of their evo-lutionary history and largely unpredictable purely from chemical or mechanical principles. However, clonality means each sequence of divide-interact-adapt stages are causally connected and their dynamics can be separated into modules and investigated with a degree of indepen-dence. For example, organ development can be studied from a key set of interacting cells without needing to track the entirety of development from the first cell. This modularity of self-organization also explains the success of organoid models that recapitulate organ physiology without originating by natural development from a sin-gle zygote. Alan Turing’s landmark reaction-diffusion model for pattern formation in tissues remains highly influential for studies of multicellular self-organization [19]. It demon-strated simple chemical rules could lead to complex pat-terns in chemical gradients and was later successfully ap-plied to a variety of periodic patterns in tissues such as zebras’ stripes or the formation of teeth and fingers. To render the mathematics more tractable, core biological properties were omitted, including division, gene regu-lation, and mechanical interactions. Hence, the model naturally has specific strengths and limitations for mul-ticellular self-organization [32], and while it brilliantly illustrates how periodic patterns can arise from chemical interactions, it is not a comprehensive theory of mor-phogenesis. Similarly, while equations-based models can accurately explain individual types of interactions, they can only capture parts rather than the whole of multicel-lular self-organization. 

> Dynamic Graphs for Multicellular Self-organization

Dynamic graph models can capture individual compo-nents along with their changing interactions, providing a useful framework for multicellular self-organization and its spatially disparate, adapting cell interactions which are governed by an assortment of underlying principles. Dynamical graph models were first proposed as general theoretical framework for applied mathematics and com-putation [33]. Unlike static graphs, whose components and interactions are fixed, dynamic graphs have nodes and edges that change (appearing, disappearing, adapt-ing, etc. ). Whereas static graphs can be understood by properties like connectivity, clustering, path lengths, etc. ,dynamic graphs are dominated by their rules of propa-gation and can often be understood as a causal sequence of individual static graphs. Dynamic graphs have been 4widely applied for causal reasoning and machine infer-ence and can be effectively learned by neural-network al-gorithms [34], but basic biologic properties have largely been absent, cell division for example only recently be-ing incorporated into such approaches [35]. Dynamic graphs were first employed to theorize multicellular self-organization, separate from computation, against the em-pirical backdrop of E. coli multicellular dynamics [1]. Po-tential principles of multicellular self-organization were then derived from this basis by exploring simple model examples. Within this framework, nodes are cells and edges are the chemical and mechanical interactions between them. Division creates new nodes and new interactions ( Fig. 1). Interactions between cells are also influenced by adaptation through gene expression. Adaptation in turn effects the particular interactions each cell experiences at any given stage, thereby creating potentially vast webs of feedback loops between adaptation and interaction [2]. As division is discrete and its characteristic time scale is comparable to gene expression in many organisms, a de-gree of self-organization can be modeled as discrete-time dynamic graphs with Boolean rules for adaptation and graph propagation (see also argument for E. coli [2]). Although chemical and mechanical signaling can be fast and noisy, their characteristic magnitudes and rates of-ten allow time averaging over windows like the cell divi-sion cycle to produce robust non-noisy genetic decisions. Discussed more below, multiple types of interactions can exist between cells, many of them local ( e.g. , direct con-tact) but others are more global ( e.g. , morphogen sig-naling). As cells divide, the multicellular graph grows and along with it a network of multicellular interactions. Furthermore, as communities branch and diversify dur-ing morphogenesis, so to do their multicellular interac-tion networks which become increasingly heterogeneous and distributed. Though this framing adds a dimension of complexity, dynamic graphs of clonal self-organization can usually be sketched with accuracy by hand if the modeled pro-cesses have been empirically observed by multicellular dynamics (see examples in [1]). Like multicellular self-organization, dynamic graphs are modular meaning indi-vidual subgraphs of smaller sets of cells can be analyzed in isolation from most long-range interactions and the overall graph. Hence, even in complex organisms, local-ized simple cases of multicellular self-organization ( e.g. ,within tissue development or organogenesis) can be sep-arately considered and sketched. Dynamic graph models also lend themselves to computation, and there may be considerable potential for human health in applying ap-propriate cellular constraints to construct dynamic graph models for multicellular self-organization. As an illustra-tive example, an attention-based algorithm to uncover dynamic graphs was recently used to learn the connec-tion between specific tumor niche architectures and clin-ical outcomes [36]. Such studies indicate more-predictive dynamic-geometry-based prognoses are on the horizon and contribute to a shift in understanding some cancers as aberrant multicellular self-organization, resulting from mis-regulation of normal genetic programs, rather than selfish evolution of individual cells. 

> Multicellular Interaction Networks

Dynamic multicellular interaction networks ( Fig. 2)are a logical consequence of framing multicellular self-organization by dynamic graphs [2]. Such networks arise because cells in communities impose chemical and me-chanical effects on one another (electrical, magnetic, and thermal effects may also be usefully considered in cases). Interactions are inevitable: cells exert forces and alter the chemical properties of their shared environment, produc-ing combinatorial sets of simultaneously experienced in-teractions. Division creates spatial asymmetries in com-munities, and many organisms perform asymmetric di-vision intentionally to diversify adaptation among sister cells. Further division can amplify the diversity of cell adaptations and interactions iteratively at each stage of self-organization. This entails interaction networks are spatially distributed and non-uniform. As mentioned above, interactions between cells can be interpreted by gene networks to drive adaptation. Hence, multicellular interaction networks are transient webs of locally speci-fied gene-network inputs covering self-organizing popula-tions of cells. Pair-wise edges between nodes are largely effective for capturing direct mechanical interactions between cells. They can be undirected to capture reciprocal interactions or directional when forces between cells are sensed by one but not the other. Chemical interactions mediated by dif-fusible molecules are more diffuse and might be poorly captured by pair-wise edges (neuronal synapses being an important exception). Diffusible chemical signals, like morphogens and quorum-sensing molecules, would be better represented as hyperedges which connect sets of nodes and address a common limitation within classi-cal graph theory. The incorporation of hyperedges into graphical approaches has been elaborated for intracellu-lar networks [37], and similar ideas would apply to mul-ticellular interaction networks. Hyperedges also enable encoding of multicellular interactions based on the de-pletion or absence of diffusible molecules or collective mechanical properties of tissues studied, both of which are regularly gene-network inputs. To be self-organizing, the semi-stable patterns of mul-ticellular interaction networks must occur in a reliable sequence. Such interactions can be critical inputs for gene networks thereby determining adaptation and fu-ture multicellular interactions. Thus, for cell adaptations to occur reliably at a developmental stage, gene network inputs and corresponding multicellular interactions must also be reliably generated. Correspondingly, dynamic ge-ometries and properties that enable the reliability of mul-ticellular interaction networks are central to multicellu-5multicellular interaction networks diverse pairwise interactions (e.g. , mechanical, chemical) hyperedge interactions (e.g. , diffusible molecules) 

FIG. 2. Multicellular interaction networks. Interactions (edges) between cells (nodes) dynamically change and are dis-tributed over populations of self-organizing cells. The set of such interactions in the dynamic-graph framework represents a multicellular interaction network. The individual edges of such networks can be directed, weighted, combinatorial, and/or diverse (or not). Many mechanical and some chemical interactions between cells can be encoded by such pairwise edges. However, some multicellular interactions, like those mediated by diffusible molecules ( e.g. , morphogens, metabo-lites, and so on), simultaneously connect many cells. These interactions would be better encoded as hyperedges which simultaneously connect many nodes. Hyperedges were de-veloped to address the pair-wise limitation of classical graph theory for complex systems. 

larity and development. From this constraint, several ideas follow naturally, like the importance of forming de-velopmental rosettes or extending internal volumes with controlled dimensions [1]. Many potential multicellular interactions can coincide, providing cells an opportunity to encode spatial position and developmental time by combinatorially regulating genes through multiple input signals. Such combinatorial regulation would be an effec-tive way to enable robust gene expression. Alone, a chem-ical or mechanical signal might just bust be a transient property of the environment, but in conjunction such signals could uniquely predict a cell’s specific multicel-lular position and stage. Such combinatorial regulation by multicellular interactions networks provided a useful explanation for the robust and sequential activation of otherwise-noisy genes during E. coli self-organization [2]. 

Control of Genes by Multicellular Interaction Networks 

While multicellular interaction networks can serve as inputs for gene networks, they are also produced by the outputs of gene networks, raising the potential for dynamically-changing webs of feedback loops between cell adaptation and interaction. In clonal communi-ties, the types of interactions and their degree, location, timing, and combination with other interactions all di-rectly result from divisions and adaptations of preceding cells. Given the chain of causality for clonally organizing cells, progeny share substantial identity with progenitors from which they have divided and diversified. In the clonal case then, cells could specify the inputs for their own gene networks and use multicellular interaction net-works to control their own genes, previously introduced as multicellular control of gene networks [2]. “Control,” in this engineering sense, means robustly determining a variable’s dynamic changes, and distinguishes this phe-nomenon from more straightforward gene induction or gene regulation. This “multicellular control” of genes by self-generated interaction networks follows logically from the division, adaptation, and interaction of cells in clonal communities when considered within a graphical frame-work. Multicellular interaction networks may therefore func-tion as a dynamic and distributed control layer for gene networks in clonally self-organizing communities, thereby precisely determining their sequential adaptations. This control mechanism, by contrast, is not intrinsic to non-clonal organization, where multicellular interactions are more probabilistic and less predictable. Multicellular control also illustrates a mechanism for iteratively evolv-ing multicellular complexity: re-configuring gene net-works to control beneficial traits via the stage-dependent multicellular interactions generated by a community [2]. As a corollary, dynamic behaviors like self-organization of interaction networks will in cases be essential for ex-plaining some of the complicated genetic circuitry within cells. Understanding many gene networks would there-fore depend on knowing the corresponding multicellular interaction networks, as previously suggested [2]. Mul-ticellular control of genes by interaction networks allows cells in clonally organizing communities a unique way to control their behavior not otherwise possible. Further consideration in the context of community multicellular dynamics reveals the importance of multicellular control for self-organization. 

Multicellular- and Developmental Daisy Chains 

Reliable sequences of semi-stable patterns are a primary property of self-organization. Multicellular control by interaction networks would directly enable this property. Gene-network outputs at one stage generate multicellu-lar interactions that then serve as inputs for gene net-works at later stages, i.e. , gene networks are tempo-rally daisy-chained through multicellular interaction net-works [2]. Looking forward in time, gene networks spec-ify the inputs that will be experienced by cells at fu-ture states; looking backward, the inputs for key gene networks have been reliably produced by the genetically regulated behaviors of preceding cells. The iterative cou-pling of interaction-adaptation feedback loops through multicellular control thereby constitutes a “multicellular 6daisy chain” for a clonal community’s dynamics ( Fig. 3 ). First introduced for understanding E. coli gene regula-tion during self-organization [2], this model is also deriv-able from the basic properties of cells. “Developmen-tal daisy chains” is then a more appropriate description for obligate multicellular organisms whose developmen-tal behaviors are widely accepted. Within daisy chains, multicellular interaction networks serve as a dynamic and distributed control layer, and the corresponding gene net-works serve as the hard-wired logic for sensing and mod-ifying this control layer. To represent daisy chains by dynamic graphs, interactions are the edges (and hyper-edges) that change as graphs propagate and gene net-works are a separate form of static graphs that represent how nodes interpret these edges and adapt them to define the rules of graph propagation. As interaction networks branch and diversify during morphogenesis so would the daisy chains they generate. In this way, the key inputs determining the behavior of each cell at each time can be reliably specified within the interaction-adaptation logic of a daisy chain. Development daisy chains provide a model for how a series of semi-stable multicellular patterns are reliably propagated by a clonal community based on the adapta-tions and interactions of cells, their fundamental units. Without this sequential coupling, multicellular interac-tions and corresponding gene-network inputs would be unreliable. Cells’ inputs would lack predictability and as a result their adaptations and behaviors would as well. Considerations discussed above and previously [2], point to the possibility that daisy chains are necessary and sufficient for producing multicellular self-organization (a more detailed discussion of this will be needed in the future). This would entail that every functional daisy chain creates self-organizing behavior, and any instance of multicellular self-organization relies in part on a daisy chain. This would further suggest that any new form of multicellular self-organization (evolved or programmed by synthetic biology) requires creation of a new daisy chain, either de novo or by modifying an existing daisy chain (achievable by rewiring its gene networks or con-trolling it through its external inputs). Though here pre-sented theoretically, the daisy chain model is supported by interpretation [1, 2] of the detailed evidence of E. coli 

multicellular self-organization [3–5]. Multicellular self-organization is one among many cel-lular phenomena critical to developmental biology. Mul-ticellular control and daisy chains complement exist-ing gene regulation paradigms like homeostasis and au-tonomous development ( i.e. , “developmental gene cas-cades” and “hierarchical gene regulatory networks”). While homeostatic regulation maintains critical cellular processes through feedback loops, autonomous develop-mental regulation drives cell-intrinsic programs that op-erate independently of external cues. Multicellular con-trol adds to these by using self-produced multicellular in-teractions as dynamic inputs to coordinate stage-specific adaptations. While each example of development may propagation 

> outputs inputs multicellular control predictably-modified interactions
> developmental daisy chaining (in one cell for one step of multicellular self-organization)
> iterative feedback

FIG. 3. Developmental daisy chains. As groups of cells prop-agate by clonal multicellular self-organization (represented as the transition from the graph in the upper left to the one in bottom right), each cell experiences specific combinations of interactions (inset, left) deriving from the communities’ over-all multicellular interaction network ( Fig. 2 ). These interac-tions can serve as inputs for each cell’s gene networks (inset, middle) via multicellular control, as articulated. The out-puts of these gene networks drive adaptation, including cell-fate and -differentiation decisions. Moreover, these outputs can modify the cell’s local multicellular interaction network (inset, right). In clonal populations, such modifications are predictable because they were generated by progenitors and their neighbors. Modified interactions feedback iteratively as dynamic and distributed inputs for subsequent rounds of multicellular control. Such predictive and iterative feedback of gene networks and multicellular interactions networks in clonal self-organization has been described as multicellular daisy chaining. The resulting multicellular- or developmen-tal daisy chains provide an underlying mechanism for clonal multicellular self-organization by linking the dynamics of cell division, adaptation, and interaction. Moreover, they model how clonal self-organizing populations can robustly and adap-tively control the fate, differentiation, and morphogenesis of each of their cells. 

arise from complicated blends of these paradigms, mul-ticellular control uniquely explains the underlying pro-cesses of multicellular self-organization. In many suffi-ciently large and diversified multicellular communities, groups of cells ( i.e. , tissues and organs) will take on differing behaviors and inevitably interact with each other as individual components of a higher scale of self-organization. In the case of clonal organisms, similar points regarding the predictable dynamics and reliable propagation of such interactions would apply, and par-allel daisy-chain-like ideas could illustrate how networks of physiological interactions between organs predictively determine multicellular interaction networks at the more granular scale. As the complexity of a daisy chain would grow in pro-portion to the number of divisions, adaptations, and branching points, computational approaches which ex-cel at keeping track of many contingent and combinato-7rial interactions will be useful. As discussed [1] however, some multicellular geometries (or sub-graphs) are better than others at enabling reliable propagation of interac-tion networks. Complex daisy chains can therefore be refactored into modular sets of such multicellular inter-action motifs [2] which can be studied individually. As multicellular interactions provide the rules for multicel-lular self-organization, such interactions motifs should be foundational to the biology of multicellular organisms. The idea that cell behaviors are determined by net-works of interacting molecular components launched systems biology and inspired many computational and machine-inference approaches. It also suggested that de-terministic models might be a remote possibility given cells’ internal complexity. Modular cell biology [38], where the behavior of individual sub-networks or “mod-ules” ( e.g. , signaling cascades) could be deciphered by precise theory-guided experiments, suggested a way for-ward and motivated a generation of experimental sys-tems biologists. Analogously, a modular multicellular biology to investigate dynamic multicellular interaction networks and their connections to gene networks could motivate a new generation of systems biologists to eluci-date foundational multicellular motifs and put them to-gether to comprehensively understand multicellular self-organization and predictably program it. Modular multi-cellular biology , defined as such, is likely essential for un-derstanding multicellular organisms. Enticingly, multi-cellular interaction networks are both spatially and tem-porally modular and are sparser than molecular inter-actions networks: modular multicellular biology should prove more tractable than modular cell biology has been. More immediately, this perspective could help reframe multicellular bacterial infections, a persistently urgent set of problems. Many infections are characterized by multicellular bacterial communities, comprising dozens to hundreds of cells. Even without acquired antibiotic re-sistance, such communities are highly tolerant to antibi-otics and contribute to persistent infections (in turn driv-ing greater antibiotic use and the spread of resistance). 

Mycobacterium tuberculosis has plagued humans as a leading cause of death worldwide for centuries. M. tu-berculosis forms clonal multicellular chains (known since the microbe’s discovery and termed “cords”) that have biofilm-like properties and were recently documented in samples from patients [39]. These chains are similar to those E. coli self-organizes [3, 5] and also evidently create and extend an internal space between cells. More direct studies of the multicellular dynamics of M. tuberculosis 

cords might reveal they do indeed self-organize by feed-back between multicellular interactions and gene expres-sion and perhaps drive antibiotic-tolerant dormancy like in E. coli . Such findings would indicate that targeting 

M. tuberculosis multicellular interactions could improve treatment by existing antibiotics and halt the behaviors that make this microbe so deadly. 

> Outlook

Since Antonie van Leeuwenhoek’s improvements to mi-croscopy centuries ago, we have looked at cells and seen what they do. But to see patterns, especially ones that dynamically morph and disappear, we must know what to look for, and theoretical perspectives therefore regu-larly guide empirical study of cell behavior. The ideas presented, e.g. multicellular interaction networks, mul-ticellular control, developmental daisy chains, etc. , can help frame empirical observations and interpretations of cellular interactions across biological organisms, and there may be little value in further purely theoretical de-velopments. The underpinning basis in dynamic graphs further suggests these ideas can be adapted into com-putational approaches to uncover the governing interac-tions of multicellular organisms, which are composed of many individual cells that divide, adapt, and interact in diverse, distributed, dynamic ways. Future advances in multicellular self-organization will certainly uncover ad-ditional dynamic multicellular patterns across differing organisms and possibly foundational interaction-network motifs for self-organization. More practically though, they will be integral to reverse engineering diseases and forward engineering new biological solutions. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The author thanks the two reviewers for their comments which have thoroughly guided revisions. No funding was received for this research. 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

K.R.A. wrote the manuscript and created the figures. 

COMPETING INTERESTS 

The author declares no competing financial or non-financial interests.       

> [1] D. Puri and K. R. Allison, Multicellular self-organization in Escherichia coli (2025), arXiv:2503.03001. [2] K. R. Allison, Multicellular control of gene networks (2025), arXiv:2508.11783. [3] D. Puri, X. Fang, and K. R. Allison, Evidence of a pos-sible multicellular life cycle in Escherichia coli, iScience
> 26 , 105795 (2023). [4] D. Puri, X. Fang, and K. R. Allison, Fluorescence-based protocol for revealing cellular arrangement in biofilms, STAR protocols 4, 102270 (2023). [5] D. Puri and K. R. Allison, Escherichia coli self-organizes developmental rosettes, Proceedings of the National

8

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 

121 , e2315850121 (2024). [6] G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Self-Organization in Nonequi-librium Systems: From Dissipative Structures to Order Through Fluctuations (Wiley, 1977). [7] J. D. Halley and D. A. Winkler, Consistent concepts of self-organization and self-assembly, Complexity 14 , 10 (2008). [8] F. Heylighen, Complexity and Self-Organization, in En-cyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences (CRC Press, 2009) 3rd ed. [9] H. Haken and J. Portugali, Information and Self-Organization, Entropy 19 , 18 (2017). [10] C. M. Dobson, Protein folding and misfolding, Nature 

426 , 884 (2003). [11] S. A. Levin, Self-organization and the Emergence of Complexity in Ecological Systems, BioScience 55 , 1075 (2005). [12] T. Misteli, The concept of self-organization in cellular ar-chitecture, The Journal of Cell Biology 155 , 181 (2001). [13] E. Karsenti, Self-organization in cell biology: a brief history, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 9, 255 (2008). [14] T. J. Mitchison and C. M. Field, Self-Organization of Cellular Units, Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 37 , 23 (2021). [15] R. Heald, R. Tournebize, T. Blank, R. Sandaltzopoulos, P. Becker, A. Hyman, and E. Karsenti, Self-organization of microtubules into bipolar spindles around artificial chromosomes in Xenopus egg extracts, Nature 382 , 420 (1996). [16] A. Desai and T. J. Mitchison, Microtubule Polymeriza-tion Dynamics, Annual Review of Cell and Developmen-tal Biology 13 , 83 (1997). [17] F. J. Nedelec, T. Surrey, A. C. Maggs, and S. Leibler, Self-organization of microtubules and motors, Nature 

389 , 305 (1997). [18] S. F. Banani, H. O. Lee, A. A. Hyman, and M. K. Rosen, Biomolecular condensates: organizers of cellular biochemistry, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 18 ,285 (2017). [19] A. M. Turing, The chemical basis of morphogenesis, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon-don. B, Biological Sciences 237 , 37 (1952). [20] F. Schweisguth and F. Corson, Self-Organization in Pat-tern Formation, Developmental Cell 49 , 659 (2019). [21] A. X. S. Dos Santos and P. Liberali, From single cells to tissue self-organization, The FEBS journal 286 , 1495 (2019). [22] S. Ramaswamy, The Mechanics and Statistics of Active Matter, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 1,323 (2010). [23] S. Shankar, A. Souslov, M. J. Bowick, M. C. Marchetti, and V. Vitelli, Topological active matter, Nature Reviews Physics 4, 380 (2022). [24] H. Youk, Discreteness, computation, and rules of life for self-organization dynamics beyond equilibrium, Newton 

2, 100358 (2026). [25] M. B. Johnson, A. R. March, and L. Morsut, Engineer-ing multicellular systems: using synthetic biology to con-trol tissue self-organization, Current opinion in biomedi-cal engineering 4, 163 (2017). [26] S. Toda, L. R. Blauch, S. K. Y. Tang, L. Morsut, and W. A. Lim, Programming self-organizing multicellular structures with synthetic cell-cell signaling, Science 361 ,156 (2018). [27] M. R. Ebrahimkhani and M. Ebisuya, Synthetic develop-mental biology: build and control multicellular systems, Current opinion in chemical biology 52 , 9 (2019). [28] J. A. Brassard and M. P. Lutolf, Engineering Stem Cell Self-organization to Build Better Organoids, Cell Stem Cell 24 , 860 (2019). [29] K. Mizuno, T. Hirashima, and S. Toda, Robust tissue pattern formation by coupling morphogen signal and cell adhesion, EMBO Reports 25 , 4803 (2024). [30] A. Seb´ e-Pedr´ os, A. Tanay, M. K. N. Lawniczak, D. Arendt, S. Aerts, J. Archibald, M. I. Arnone, M. Blax-ter, P. Cleves, S. M. Coelho, M. Dias, C. Dunn, A. Elek, J. Frazer, T. Gabald´ on, J. Gillis, X. Grau-Bov´ e, R. Guig´ o, O. Hobert, J. Huerta-Cepas, M. Ir-imia, A. Klein, H. Lewin, C. J. Lowe, H. Marlow, J. M. Musser, L. G. Nagy, S. R. Najle, L. Pachter, S. Paez, I. Papatheodorou, M. J. Passalacqua, N. Rajewsky, S. Y. Rhee, T. A. Richards, T. Sauka-Spengler, L. M. Saun-ders, E. Seuntjens, J. Solana, Y. Song, U. Technau, and B. Wang, The Biodiversity Cell Atlas: mapping the tree of life at cellular resolution, Nature 645 , 877 (2025). [31] A. H. Knoll, The Multiple Origins of Complex Multicel-lularity, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 

39 , 217 (2011). [32] A. N. Landge, B. M. Jordan, X. Diego, and P. M¨ uller, Pattern formation mechanisms of self-organizing reaction-diffusion systems, Developmental Bi-ology Systems Biology of Pattern Formation, 460 , 2 (2020). [33] F. Harary and G. Gupta, Dynamic graph models, Math-ematical and Computer Modelling 25 , 79 (1997). [34] A. Pareja, G. Domeniconi, J. Chen, T. Ma, T. Suzumura, H. Kanezashi, T. Kaler, T. B. Schardl, and C. E. Leis-erson, EvolveGCN: Evolving Graph Convolutional Net-works for Dynamic Graphs (2019), arXiv:1902.10191v3. [35] T. Yamamoto, K. Cockburn, V. Greco, and K. Kawaguchi, Probing the rules of cell coordina-tion in live tissues by interpretable machine learning based on graph neural networks, PLoS Computational Biology 18 , e1010477 (2022). [36] C. Zuo, J. Xia, Y. Xu, Y. Xu, P. Gao, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, and L. Chen, stClinic dissects clinically relevant niches by integrating spatial multi-slice multi-omics data in dy-namic graphs, Nature communications 16 , 5317 (2025). [37] S. Klamt, U.-U. Haus, and F. Theis, Hypergraphs and Cellular Networks, PLOS Computational Biology 5,e1000385 (2009). [38] L. H. Hartwell, J. J. Hopfield, S. Leibler, and A. W. Mur-ray, From molecular to modular cell biology, Nature 402 ,C47 (1999). [39] T. R. Lerner, C. J. Queval, R. P. Lai, M. R. Russell, A. Fearns, D. J. Greenwood, L. Collinson, R. J. Wilkin-son, and M. G. Gutierrez, Mycobacterium tuberculosis cords within lymphatic endothelial cells to evade host immunity, JCI Insight 5, e136937 (2020).