Title: DigiPhen: a new paradigm for building predictive models of biological systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.22079v1

Published Time: Tue, 25 Aug 2026 00:47:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# DigiPhen: a new paradigm for building predictive models of biological systems 

H. Steven Wiley ∗1,2 , Angela Cintolesi 1, Niaz Bahar Chowdhury 1, Jaydeep P. Bardhan 1, Song Feng 1, Steven S. Andrews 2, Herbert M. Sauro 2, Kristin E. Burnum-Johnson 1, Scott E. Baker 1,and Douglas Mans 1

> 1

Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, USA 

> 2

Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 

Abstract 

Reengineered biological systems have the potential to revolutionize chemical and material production, enhance critical mineral recovery, serve as threat sensors and improve human health. Unfortunately, the extreme complexity of organisms has made it difficult to achieve this poten-tial in all but the simplest cases. Recent technological advances, however, have provided a foundation for solving this problem. Here, we describe a capability for accelerating the reengi-neering of cells by providing accurate predictions of the impact of genetic or environmental changes on cell phenotype. This “digital phenome” platform (DigiPhen) consists of integrated experimental, analytical and modeling workflows for building a digital representation of micro-bial or plant systems. It is designed around an expanding set of interchangeable, interconnecting software and experimental modules that can accurately represent the mechanistic determinants of phenotype. The DigiPhen platform will systematically collect data on cell composition, spa-tial organization, metabolic pathways and regulatory networks in a semi-autonomous fashion and use this information to build modular, multi-scale models of biological systems. These mod-els will be used to predict molecular and environmental changes needed for producing desired biological outcomes. DigiPhen is intended to be the heart of community research campaigns that will meet the immediate needs of individual researchers while fulfilling long-term goals of the scientific community. Altogether, the DigiPhen platform represents a new paradigm for building predictive models of biological systems. 

# Introduction 

Biological systems have the potential to revolutionize chemical and materials production, isolate rare elements and improve human health [1-3]. Because of this potential, an enormous amount of work has focused on identifying the range of extant organisms and their functional properties with the aim of either using them directly or optimizing their molecular machinery for useful purposes. While there are successful examples of using synthetic biology to optimize metabolic pathways [4], the majority of these cases involve a handful of well-studied microorganisms. Because of a lack of fundamental biological knowledge, however, many genetic changes fail to produce an expected outcome [5]. One primary reason is the numerous interconnections between biological networks and the multitude of feedback loops needed for organismal homeostasis and robustness. Consequently, 

> ∗

Corresponding author: steven.wiley@pnnl.gov 

1arXiv:2608.22079v1 [q-bio.MN] 22 Aug 2026 altering gene expression or activity might cause changes in unwanted parts of a cell’s regulatory and metabolic machinery as well as alter structural functionality [6]. Assessing the impact of genetic modifications was for decades approached heuristically, through trial-and-error [7]. More recently, kinetic and genome-scale models offered a more systematic approach [8]. While these types of models have accelerated biological discoveries—enabling, for instance, the prediction of essential genes or metabolic steps that restrain flux under specific conditions [9] —the vast complexity of biological systems and their dynamic response to their environment remains poorly captured. As a result, current computational models of cellular pathways are mostly descriptive rather than predictive. Thus, the trial-and-error approach continues to serve as the only reliable approach for addressing a wide range of biological interrogations. The benchmarking of computational models of cellular pathways that is needed to improve their predictive power, has been hindered by the lack of standardized data and consistent biological objectives [10]. This has created a major bottleneck for progress in the field. Insufficient informa-tion on modification-phenotype relationships, along with limited modeling frameworks, has further compounded the challenge [11]. Solving these problems is hindered by the current social structure of the biological sciences, where research is predominantly driven by single investigators or small teams of scientists [12]. This makes it difficult to tackle the immense problem of developing broadly predictive models of cellular behavior. Addressing these longstanding challenges is well beyond the capacity of any single research group and therefore requires a new, collaborative, and large-scale approach to move the field forward. We propose the DigiPhen (Digital Phenome) platform as one of the foundations of this new approach. The DigiPhen platform is a community-focused, integrated data generating-modeling capability whose long-term goal is to provide the data and modeling foundation for building a microbial “virtual cell” [13]. We have been inspired by the success of the Protein Structure Initiative (PSI), which laid the foundation for predicting protein structures from amino acid sequence, a problem that was once thought to be computationally intractable [14]. The PSI was initiated in 2000 and focused on developing the technologies needed for high-throughput protein structure determination [15]. Although the PSI directly generated only 5000 3D structures for the Protein Data bank, their technologies and scientific leadership helped expand this number to currently over 210,000 [16]. Significantly, the experimental work became the foundation for computational predictions of protein structure based on both evolutionary and thermodynamic rules. This directly led to the current generation of highly accurate AI systems for predicting protein structure from its sequence, such as Alphafold2 [17]. A large dataset of protein sequence-structure relationships was critical for the development of AI-powered protein predictions as was the ability to validate model prediction by experiments. Similarly, an integrated data generating – modeling capability is the fundamental paradigm for DigiPhen with the expectation that it will also lead to systems that can predict a cell’s functional response based on its composition and environment. 

# Approach 

The overall strategy in developing the DigiPhen platform was to start with currently available data generation and modeling technologies that could be progressively modified to yield an integrated computational and data-generating framework. The current effort is being led by a community-focused scientific team at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in conjunction with two advisory committees: a science-focused committee that helps design a yearly research campaign focused on a specific set of goals, and a data management committee that is focused on the challenge 2of ensuring the experiments will generate the data and metadata needed to support the modeling efforts. DigiPhen is envisioned as being a major component of the user program at the Environ-mental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, one of the premier Department of Energy Office of Science user facilities of the Biological and Environmental Research (BER) program (https://science.osti.gov/ber/Facilities). As such, it must meet the needs of independent sci-entific teams performing research on topics relevant to BER missions. At the same time, DigiPhen will leverage these research projects to generate the data needed to build large scale, predictive models of microbial systems. Predicting cell phenotypes from cell composition is a far more complex problem than predicting protein structure from its sequence. In addition, a protein’s structure is a more easily defined endpoint than a cell’s “phenotype”. Previous whole-cell models have been limited to predicting the impact of a narrow set of conditions and genetic changes in part because of the lack of data across different environmental conditions [18]. The DigiPhen platform is built around a set of automated, high-throughput instruments that are designed to help fill this data gap ( Table 1 ), with the understanding that current technologies cannot always measure important cell parameters, such as intermediate metabolites. Continuous improvement in analytical capabilities is an essential part of the DigiPhen platform. However, analytical upgrades will be done with an eye towards the demands of the newest modeling paradigms, helping to drive progress in both areas. Despite advancements in methodologies for measuring cell composition (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics, transcriptomics), these technologies still do not generate the enormous amount of different types of data needed to build completely data-driven, genome-scale predictive models of cell regulatory and metabolic networks [13]. One way to reduce the amount of needed data is to constrain solution space through the use of empirical or physics-based “rules”. This approach was used successfully in developing the AI tool AlphaFold2 for predicting protein structure [17]. Still, it cost well over $1B to generate the data needed to train AlphaFold2 [14, 19]. Generating the molecular-level data needed to train a completely data-driven AI model of cell phenotype would be prohibitively expensive, even if it was possible [13]. Creating a higher level of abstraction is a good way to reduce the complexity of a model and thus the amount of data needed to build it [20]. In solving the protein folding problem, the concept of protein domains was an abstraction used to parse the overall problem into subproblems [21]. Evolutionary constraints were also used. Because protein structure is the target of evolutionary selection rather than sequence, structures are more highly conserved [22]. Pairs of interacting amino acids are also conserved because they contribute to important structural features [23]. Thus, there is a definable relationship between conserved pairs of amino acids and protein structure. This rule greatly reduced the potential protein folding landscape and helped make structure predictions computationally tractable [17]. Similarly, there are rules by which biological systems are built and operate. One generally accepted rule is that biological mechanisms are both hierarchical and modular [24, 25]. In complex multi-cellular organisms, modularity can be observed in terms of specialized organs and tissues, such as the heart and lungs [26]. Even at the cellular level, a number of highly conserved modules can be identified, such as mitochondria for energy production, ribosomes for protein synthesis and the cell cycle for DNA replication and cell partitioning. The hierarchical regulation of these modules is a yet unsolved problem [27, 28]. At the level of cellular networks, there is even greater ambiguity as to what constitutes a mod-3Table 1: Current analytical capabilities available to the DigiPhen platform 

Analytical capa-bility Instruments Generated data 

Cytometry Flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting Cell numbers, population frequencies, and viability measurements Plate readers Automated optical-density and fluo-rescence spectrometers Cell density, growth rates, reaction kinetics, biomass estimates, cell viability, and enzyme activity High-content imag-ing Imaging flow cytometry Multiparameter phenotype classification, spa-tial localization, organelle features, and biofilm analysis Mass spectrometry LC–MS/MS (Orbitrap Astral, Orbi-trap IQ-X Tribrid, TSQ Altis Plus, and timsTOF) Quantitative measurements of intracellular and extracellular metabolites and lipids, pro-tein expression and abundance, protein modifi-cations, and targeted proteomics Imaging mass spec-trometry MALDI-MS (timsTOF flex with MALDI-2 and MALDI-12T FT-ICR) Protein and metabolite distributions in cells and communities NMR Bruker Avance NMR spectrometer Metabolomics, protein structure and confor-mational analysis, and protein–ligand binding FT-ICR mass spec-trometry 21-T FT-ICR mass spectrometer Ultrahigh-resolution metabolomics, complex lipidomics, natural-product characterization, and modified-protein analysis Single-cell analysis NanoPOTS coupled to high-resolution LC–MS/MS; SPLiT-seq Spatial analysis of protein and gene expression  

> Abbreviations: FT-ICR, Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance; LC–MS/MS, liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry; MALDI-MS, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry; NanoPOTS, nanodroplet processing in one pot for trace samples; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; SPLiT-seq, split-pool ligation-based transcriptome sequencing.

ule [29, 30]. There are clearly a number of operational subsystems in cells, such as metabolism, stress responses and environmental sensing. They are comprised of a series of interacting protein complexes, but how these are organized, regulated and coordinated is far less clear [29]. Recent more detailed studies on the regulation of metabolic and protein interaction networks have started to elucidate some of their governing rules, such as the principle of resource allocation [31], which hint at their modular nature and interconnection. However, far more work is needed to transform experimental observations into practical rules that can be used to constrain predictive models [29]. Dynamic, multi-omics data generated by the DigiPhen platform will provide a foundation for building more detailed mechanistic models, such as kinetic models based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs). These types of models can be constrained by data on protein abundance and intercellular metabolite levels [32, 33]. They can also include regulatory and feedback mechanisms. Unfortunately, these types of models tend to be very complex and require detailed knowledge of enzymatic mechanisms, making them difficult to build and parameterize [34]. Creating a level of abstraction, such as modules, is one way to simplify the building of ODE-based models [35]. 4Foundational Infrastructure 

Because of the high degree of complexity of biological systems and their environments, enormous amounts of data will be needed to describe their responses. Thus the foundation of the Digiphen platform is an automated experimental workflow coupled to high-throughput measurement tech-nologies. Data from measurements are automatically linked to essential metadata and deposited into a central data repository. Experiments can be set up manually or with agentic AI tools. A variety of data types will initially be generated from the DigiPhen platform ( Table 1 ). These data will include optical density (OD) measurements as well as fluorescence data for microbes with tagged proteins or other fluorescent markers allowing researchers to generate growth rates for microbes or microbial communities [36, 37]. Culture conditions must necessarily be varied so that a wide parameter space of both nutritional and other (pH, temperature, etc) growth conditions can be explored. Mass spectrometry-based multi-omic data will be generated for selected samples, but choices will have to be made to determine which subset of cultivations will be used for more detailed phenotyping. Work is in progress to integrate phenotyping analytics with AI agents to select the subset of cultivation conditions and/or genetic perturbations to be used for deeper phenotyping. Standardized data and metadata will be collected at every step and normalized so that comparisons can be made across samples and experiments [38]. 

# Essential aspects of the DigiPhen platform 

We acknowledge that developing a useful virtual cell is a daunting task because of the sheer com-plexity of biological systems, the lack of adequate modeling frameworks and a paucity of relevant data. To meet this challenge, we have designed a multifaceted program, as shown in Figure 1. This program is focused on a set of six distinct goals: 1. Reduce the complexity of the problem 2. Develop useful modeling frameworks 3. Collect the right kind of data 4. Collect sufficient amounts of data 5. Engage the scientific community 6. Benchmark progress Other scientific fields have faced similar challenges in building digital representations of complex systems, and we have designed our program to incorporate their best practices for dealing with issues such as complexity and scale. For example, the current large scale earth system models started from basic weather models that evolved over time to include ever-increasing spatial and temporal details [39]. Their successful evolution over the last 50 years also required community engagement, data and modeling standards, and rigorous evaluation and validation of model extensions [40]. The highly accurate weather predictions currently generated by these models are a testament to the success of that approach. 5Figure 1: A community-driven framework for building a virtual microbial cell. The project is driven by the EMSL user community who brings specific problems that can be addressed by the advanced computational and experimental capabilities in EMSL. Problems typically focus on a specific functional subsystem of cells that can be described in terms of regulatory hierarchy and functional modules. The relationship and activity of these subsystems are described in terms of both genome-scale and mechanistic models. These models are built and parameterized by a wide variety of high-throughput data collected by automated instrument systems. AI-assisted experimental design is used to optimize the data that is collected to enhance model accuracy and usefulness. The resulting models are validated using a community-based benchmarking process. Results of each experimental/modeling campaign are used to iteratively improve the DigiPhen workflow and underlying processes. 6Reducing the complexity of the problem 

Most biological processes are the product of dozens to thousands of molecular interactions and reactions. Molecular-level models of any but the simplest systems are not only difficult to build but are computationally expensive to parameterize and run [41]. The solution is to develop a level of abstraction that can hide the complexity [42], such as defining biological networks in terms of their design patterns or modular structure [34, 43]. Modularity is a particularly appealing level of abstraction because it would directly facilitate build-ing multi-scale models [44]. It has also been shown to be a useful concept for reengineering metabolic pathways [45]. By definition, the functions of modules are mostly independent of their context and thus should behave the same regardless of the system in which they are expressed [46]. This context-independence is why modularity is the basis of building electronic and software system: it allows the behavior of systems to be predicted from the behavior of their modules rather than individual components [47]. This greatly simplifies the process of designing modified cells for synthetic biology applications. Although it is widely postulated that biological systems are both hierarchical and modular, these terms lack precise biochemical definitions. Several studies have suggested that modules can be defined in terms of feedback and insulation from downstream elements [48]. These concepts have not been widely explored or validated, mostly because proposed mechanisms of insulation and feedback, such as molecular modifications and allosteric regulation, are difficult to experimentally measure. However, recent advances in mass spectrometry and AI-based tools to infer protein-ligand binding have provided powerful new approaches to measure biological network structure and dynamics [49-51] An important goal of DigiPhen will be to use new measurement technologies to help identify boundaries of biological modules and provide a simplifying level of abstraction for complex biologi-cal systems. Other levels of abstraction, such as functional traits will also be explored [52, 53]. The usefulness of such abstractions will be assessed by the degree to which they can reduce the amount of data needed to train predictive models of cell responses. 

# Develop useful modeling frameworks 

A cell is more than just its metabolism. Building a virtual cell that can predict responses to a wide variety of environmental and genetic change will require more than just modeling metabolism. It will require modeling environmental detection, regulatory mechanisms, replication machinery, stress responses and anticipatory mechanisms. Recasting individual subsystems as modules will be helpful, but there are also issues of describing how they change across different spatial and temporal scales. Towards this end, several frameworks have been recently introduced that are capable of linking multiple cell subsystems, or multiple biological processes into integrated models [54-57] . An alternative conceptual framework has been proposed that uses agent-based models (ABMs) and natural language statements (cell rules) to create mathematical models of multicellular dynamics [58]. Currently, models built using any of these frameworks lack the mechanistic details needed to make them more generally useful, but they are important proof-of concept examples for how to create multiscale models of biological systems. All modeling frameworks depend on the availability of data that can build, constrain and parameter-ize them. Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) are currently the most useful tool for predicting 7metabolic activities in a given cell type [59, 60]. They are based on an organism’s genome and the potential functions of metabolic genes but generally lack any explicit regulation [61]. Thus, they are mostly useful for predicting the potential metabolism of a cell. There have been several efforts to modify GEMs to include constraints, based on the idea that the potential for metabolism is constrained by the cell resources allocated to producing metabolic enzymes [62]. These approaches require data on protein abundance and enzyme activity ( kcat ). The first can be measured or esti-mated [63], but the latter can only be inferred. More recent developments have included data on enzyme turnover and deep learning-predicted enzyme kinetics [64]. Continuing advancements in an-alytical technologies should provide data for improving flux-balance and other modeling frameworks by introducing additional constraints and increasing the phenotypic space that can be explored. Parsing biological systems into modules also provides an opportunity to use surrogate models, such as Universal Differential Equations (UDEs) for subsystems that are poorly understood at a mechanistic level [65]. For example, we have used transfer functions generated from experimental data to successfully represent protein modules within signaling networks [66]. Likewise, we have used machine learning (ML) to predict the relationship between mRNA abundance, codon usage and translational efficiency even without full knowledge of the underlying mechanisms [67]. The large amount of detailed data that will be generated by the DigiPhen platform will provide a foundation for using AI/ML to build hybrid models that combine mechanistic and surrogate components. Other modeling approaches for building virtual cells include the use of visible neural networks (VNNs) that use ontologies to assign proteins to functional groups or nodes rather than allowing random mathematical links. When trained on the output of several million gene perturbation experiments, this class of models can accurately map the phenotypic impact of knockout of any given functional group (e.g., [68]). However, nodes in these models lack mechanistic details and only work within the context of the phenotype-specific trained model. Thus, they cannot be exchanged with other research groups, limiting their usefulness to the community at large. It is essential that models supported by the DigiPhen platform be designed around community standards. This will allow them to be incorporated into multiscale models being developed by the wider research community [69, 70]. It will also facilitate their use across different software capabilities. If such standards are not available, the DigiPhen team will work with the modeling community to establish them. These standards must be open and ideally based on underlying biological mechanisms, such as the case with the systems biology markup language (SBML) [71]. Being able to assess the reliability and reproducibility of DigiPhen models will also depend on the use of community exchange standards, such as SBML [70]. 

# Collect the right kind of data 

All models that seek to reproduce biological processes require sufficient amounts and types of quantitative data for both their construction and parameterization [72]. Unfortunately, the ideal types and amounts of data are rarely available. For example, modeling enzymatic mechanisms ideally requires data on the in-situ concentrations and localization of enzymes, substrates and product flux [73, 74]. This information is extremely difficult to directly measure, especially in the quantities needed to parameterize models. A more typical approach is to collect large amounts of inexpensive data, such as gene transcript abundance, and then try to infer the properties of interest. This not only introduces inevitable uncertainties into the models but also places a large burden on the data analysis process [75]. 8The obvious solution to the lack of appropriate data is to develop technologies to rapidly and inexpensively measure the desired information. This is not always possible, at least in the short term, but it should always remain the goal. In the meantime, improved methodologies for inferring key parameters will be essential. However, this requires understanding what types of data are most critical for building different types of models. For example, simple flux balance models that only require genomic information are unreliable [76]. Adding additional constraints, such as protein resource allocation, can improve their predictive power [77], but requires substantially more data. Although there is a substantial amount of biological data already available in public reposito-ries, much of it is not easily reusable [78]. For example, modeling metabolic feedback requires knowledge from multiple biological levels, including transcriptional control of enzyme expression, post-translational modifications, and allosteric regulation by metabolites. However, much of the data in public databases on allosteric regulators is erroneous because of lack of appropriate assay conditions [79]. Fortunately, multiple groups have described new approaches for both measuring enzyme-metabolite interactions and inferring them based on protein structure predictions [80], but the reliability of these predictions has not been widely validated. Directly measuring the impact of potential regulators is more reliable [79], but much more costly. To maximize the impact of the DigiPhen platform, there must be a dialog between modelers, data generators and data analysts to ensure that the most informative, cost-effective data for building virtual cells being collected. Identifying the most informative data will be one of the main research problems that the DigiPhen team will tackle. This will require an understanding of the best approaches for building predictive models, the most feasible technologies for generating data for those models and determining which types of analysis can provide the most reliable results. It will also be an iterative process where models enabled by new data types can be used to identify data types that will improve their performance. Machine learning approaches can also be productively used to infer important parameters for mechanistic models when they cannot be directly measured [81]. Because technology development will always lag the identification of specific data needed in modeling, identifying the necessary technologies will be a high priority. 

# Collect sufficient amounts of data 

Both traditional modeling as well as AI-enabled approaches require substantial amounts of data for their building and training [82]. In general, the more complex the model, the larger the amount of data needed in its construction. For example, mass spectrometry-based metabolomics involves trade-offs between analytical breadth, quantitative accuracy, and throughput. Targeted assays can deliver absolute quantification of a predefined panel of metabolites, whereas untargeted profil-ing detects thousands of features but yields largely relative measurements, of which only a small fraction can be confidently annotated [83]. Advances in fast chromatography, ion mobility and data-independent acquisition have nonetheless made broad metabolite profiling feasible in cohorts of thousands of samples [84, 85]. Sample processing also requires tradeoffs with increases in sen-sitivity and specificity of an analysis requiring a longer, more complex sample processing pipeline [86, 87]. Thus, generating the enormous quantities of high-quality, relevant data is likely to be one of the most significant bottlenecks in building a virtual cell. To address the data quantity problem, the DigiPhen platform is focusing on highly automated, parallelized workflows that include AI-assisted experimental design, experiment execution, sample processing, automated metadata capture and rigorous QA/QC mechanisms. An emphasis will be placed on keeping sample size to a minimum to reduce costs. Because of the anticipated scale of 9the DigiPhen platform, AI-enabled experimental workflows will be a core capability [88] Several additional approaches will be used to increase data volume, including a focus on particularly data-rich analyses, such as cell imaging. In combination with advanced image analysis algorithms, cell imaging can generate a large amount of information from each sample [89]. Because mass spectrometry is also capable of generating a large amount of data from each sample, a high priority will be placed on increasing sample throughput for this technology. However, an increase in raw data generation will also need to be accompanied by a corresponding increase in automated data capture, processing and analysis [90]. 

# Engage the scientific community 

The goal of building a virtual cell is a very ambitious and complex problem and thus will require the engagement and participation of a large community of scientists. This is perhaps the greatest challenge for DigiPhen. Traditionally, biologists have focused on a small part of an important problem, because of both the complexity of biological systems and because funding agencies tend to prioritize short term problems with well-defined outcomes [91]. Very few individual scientists would also have the expertise and range of skills needed to construct a virtual cell. Because DigiPhen is intended to support both individual users as well as long range scientific goals, it will be necessary to construct a scientific program that balances the two needs. The approach that is being used for DigiPhen is to organize work around Research Campaigns that are designed to systematically address a subset of the issues needed to build a digital cell. Research Campaigns will also address current problems that community scientists are funded to solve. DigiPhen will provide the data needed by these scientists while exploiting their expertise and their model systems. EMSL scientists will then provide the missing data and expertise needed to drive progress in solving a more general scientific goal. Thus, the needs of the user research teams will be addressed within the context of an overarching scientific problem. An example of an overarching problem is the rational management of microbial resource allocation [31]. Because of their small size, microbes face inevitable tradeoffs in allocating their resources to produce a necessary phenotype (e.g., product production, proliferation, mobility, etc.). Evolution drives resource allocation to be optimized for the particular ecological niche for which microbes are adapted. In nature, a particular niche will vary over time and microbes must be able to respond to any new conditions. Significantly, the most abundant microbes in a natural community are those able to grow on the widest range of substrates [92, 93] . Thus, significant internal resources of evolutionarily successful microbes are allocated to molecular machinery that is only potentially needed to respond to a changing environment (i.e., anticipatory regulation: [94]). When reengineering microbes to produce a new product, a major challenge is accommodating the associated metabolic impact. Resources for anticipatory regulation could ideally be reallocated for this. In addition, one would like to be able to accurately predict functionally unnecessary pathways that generate by-products that must be removed during downstream processing [95]. This would not only relieve the metabolic burden of these non-essential pathways, but also greatly facilitate downstream processing which is frequently the main cost of biomanufacturing [96]. A more efficient approach would be to identify the modules and cellular subsystems that the cell dedicates to anticipating environmental changes that cannot occur in a bioreactor (e.g., heat shock) or pathway modules that use substrates that are absent [97]. Once identified, such unnecessary subsystems could be deleted, freeing up metabolic resources for product production. However, this 10 requires understanding the modularity of the subsystems involved in these “unnecessary” functions. Being able to identify genes that encode currently unnecessary functional modules could have immediate impact for reengineering microbes. Many scientists working on developing microbial strains for bioproduction are focused on defining optimum growth conditions, substrate utilization capabilities and stress responses that can compro-mise cell growth [98]. The DigiPhen platform will be designed to rapidly explore relevant growth conditions using autonomous experimental cycles, producing data that is most likely to be useful to a user. However, the DigiPhen platform can also collect data for a much wide variety of experimen-tal conditions. This might not be of immediate use to an individual user, but when combined with data from other evaluated strains would be extremely useful in identifying the general mechanisms by which cells adapt to a shift in conditions. This is one of the ways that research campaigns can be used to meet the needs of individual research teams while providing the foundation for building a virtual cell. 

# Benchmark progress 

An important component of previous large-scale efforts to build predictive models was establishing formal benchmarking systems to assess progress. Examples include the Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment, a biennial competition for tracking protein structure predictions [99, 100] and the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) for evaluating earth systems models [101]. These types of model validation efforts require identifying metrics for how well a model recapitulates observed reality and what types of predictions are most informative. Here we propose the creation of CAMP – Critical Assessment of Microbial Phenotypes – as the community challenge in periodically assessing modeling performance and accuracy. We are currently a long way from building a virtual microbial cell that could facilitate the reengi-neering of microbes for useful purposes, so benchmarking efforts should initially be incremental in nature. The two aspects that we will initially focus on is predicting the impact of modifying gene expression and the impact on changing environmental conditions. Benchmarking model pre-dictions of genetic changes should include the impact of deleting or amplifying single and multiple genes from different functional categories (e.g., metabolism, gene regulation) as well as introducing entirely new genes. As progress is made on identifying functional modules, benchmarking can be expanded to predict the impact of removing or introducing modules as a function of cell environ-ment. Environmental conditions to be tested can include substrate addition or deletion as well as stress. As the predictive power of the models improve, validation efforts are expected to include more complex perturbations. Because all of the models and data generated by the DigiPhen platform will be freely available and based on community standards, they should be compatible with a wide variety of modeling and data analysis platforms. This will facilitate the participation of multiple research groups in the effort to build virtual cells. Thus, benchmarking could include a competition between predictions of models built by different research groups, similar to the way the DREAM Challenges are designed [11]. For example, the competition could be to identify either genetic or environmental perturbations that would give rise to a specific phenotype. These predictions could then be experimentally tested using the DigiPhen platform and the models ranked on how well they predict the observed phenotypes. Other benchmarking approaches could be applied. Regardless, the results of all of these efforts will be used for model improvement and in designing future research campaigns. It will also help 11 identify the most informative types of data, which in turn will drive the development of new analytical technologies. By including rigorous testing into the design of the DigiPhen platform, we will help ensure that we are making the most efficient use of our experimental and modeling resources. 

# Conclusions and the Future 

Building a virtual cell that can be used as the basis for cell reengineering is a very ambitious project, but one is that becoming increasingly feasible. It is also ideally suited for National Laboratories. Like the field of physics a hundred years ago, biology has been mostly in the discovery phase where the parts of the system are being identified and the rules by which they work discovered. Universities were, and still are, the place where most discoveries are being made, driven by individual research teams focused on a small part of the overall problem. Taking physics to the next level, however, required a much larger scientific enterprise that could coordinate the enormous resources needed to integrate the discoveries and implement the next steps. National Laboratories were created for this purpose and their success in revolutionizing physics is undisputed [102]. As biology transitions from a primarily descriptive to a predictive science, a similar effort to marshal large-scale scientific and technical resources is needed to take biology to the next level. National Laboratories have been laying the foundation for this work over the last several decades by building foundational analytical and computational capabilities. Now is the time when building a virtual cell is feasible and DigiPhen is one of the first step in the process. Although DigiPhen is based on current state-of-the-art capabilities, it is likely that both analytical and modeling technologies will continue to advance at a rapid pace. Thus, continuous analytical upgrades will be planned with an eye towards the demands of the newest modeling paradigms, and vice versa, helping to drive progress in both areas. The ultimate success of the capability, however, will depend on the engagement and contributions of the scientific community in the project. 

# Acknowledgements 

The work described herein was performed in the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, a national scientific user facility sponsored by the United States of America Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-76RL0 1830. Development of modeling concepts was also supported by P41 EB023912 through H.M.S. at the Center for Reproducible Biomedical Modeling. 

# Author Contributions 

H.S.W., S.E.B., K.E.B-J. and D.M. conceived and designed the study. A.C., N.B.C. and S.J. added modeling and data analysis approaches, S.S.A and H.M.S contributed ideas on modular frameworks and community engagement and J.P.B and H.M.S contributed concepts on model validation and benchmarking. H.S.W. wrote the first draft of the manuscript and prepared the figure. All authors reviewed and edited the final manuscript. No AI was used in the writing or editing of the paper, but AI assisted in looking up references and preparing the figure. 12 References 

1. Brooks, S.M. and H.S. Alper, Applications, challenges, and needs for employing synthetic biology beyond the lab. Nature Communications, 2021. 12 (1): p. 1390. 2. Brown, R.M., et al., Current nature-based biological practices for rare earth elements extraction and recovery: Bioleaching and biosorption. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2023. 173 :p. 113099. 3. Omer, R., et al., Engineered Bacteria-Based Living Materials for Biotherapeutic Applications. 

Front Bioeng Biotechnol, 2022. 10 : p. 870675. 4. Nielsen, J. and J.D. Keasling, Engineering Cellular Metabolism. Cell, 2016. 164 (6): p. 1185-1197. 5. Dougherty, E.R. and I. Shmulevich, On the limitations of biological knowledge. Curr Genomics, 2012. 13 (7): p. 574-87. 6. Singh, R.S., Decoding ‘Unnecessary Complexity’: A Law of Complexity and a Concept of Hidden Variation Behind “Missing Heritability” in Precision Medicine. J Mol Evol, 2021. 89 (8): p. 513-526. 7. Cheng, A., et al., Genetics Matters: Voyaging from the Past into the Future of Humanity and Sustainability. Int J Mol Sci, 2022. 23 (7). 8. Esvelt, K.M. and H.H. Wang, Genome-scale engineering for systems and synthetic biology. Mol Syst Biol, 2013. 9: p. 641. 9. Basler, G., Computational prediction of essential metabolic genes using constraint-based ap-proaches. Methods Mol Biol, 2015. 1279 : p. 183-204. 10. Sauro, H.M., et al., From FAIR to CURE: guidelines for computational models of biological systems. NPJ Syst Biol Appl, 2026. 12 (1). 11. Meyer, P. and J. Saez-Rodriguez, Advances in systems biology modeling: 10 years of crowd-sourcing DREAM challenges. Cell Syst, 2021. 12 (6): p. 636-653. 12. Wiley, H.S., et al., A Roadmap for the Future of Systems Biology in Cancer Research. Cancer Res, 2025. 85 (24): p. 4880-4889. 13. Bunne, C., et al., How to build the virtual cell with artificial intelligence: Priorities and opportunities. Cell, 2024. 187 (25): p. 7045-7063. 14. Michalska, K. and A. Joachimiak, Structural genomics and the Protein Data Bank. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2021. 296 : p. 100747. 15. Stevens, R.C., S. Yokoyama, and I.A. Wilson, Global efforts in structural genomics. Science, 2001. 294 (5540): p. 89-92. 16. Burley, S.K., et al., Updated resources for exploring experimentally-determined PDB structures and Computed Structure Models at the RCSB Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res, 2025. 53 (D1): p. D564-D574. 17. Jumper, J., et al., Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature, 2021. 

596 (7873): p. 583-589. 18. Dibaeinia, P., et al., Virtual Cells Need Context, Not Just Scale. bioRxiv, 2026. 13 19. Service, R.F., Structural biology. Protein structure initiative: phase 3 or phase out. Science, 2008. 319 (5870): p. 1610-3. 20. Paulevé, L., et al., Reconciling qualitative, abstract, and scalable modeling of biological networks. 

Nature Communications, 2020. 11 (1): p. 4256. 21. Zhu, K., et al., A unified approach to protein domain parsing with inter-residue distance matrix. 

Bioinformatics, 2023. 39 (2). 22. Chothia, C. and A.M. Lesk, The relation between the divergence of sequence and structure in proteins. EMBO J, 1986. 5(4): p. 823-6. 23. Sousounis, K., et al., Conservation of the three-dimensional structure in non-homologous or unrelated proteins. Hum Genomics, 2012. 6(1): p. 10. 24. Caetano-Anolles, G., et al., Emergence of Hierarchical Modularity in Evolving Networks Un-covered by Phylogenomic Analysis. Evol Bioinform Online, 2019. 15 : p. 1176934319872980. 25. Hatleberg, W.L. and V.F. Hinman, Modularity and hierarchy in biological systems: Using gene regulatory networks to understand evolutionary change. Curr Top Dev Biol, 2021. 141 : p. 39-73. 26. Lorenz, D.M., A. Jeng, and M.W. Deem, The emergence of modularity in biological systems. 

Phys Life Rev, 2011. 8(2): p. 129-60. 27. Guo, M.G., D.N. Sosa, and R.B. Altman, Challenges and opportunities in network-based solutions for biological questions. Brief Bioinform, 2022. 23 (1). 28. Alcala-Corona, S.A., et al., Modularity in Biological Networks. Front Genet, 2021. 12 :p. 701331. 29. Kaltenbach, H.M. and J. Stelling, Modular analysis of biological networks. Adv Exp Med Biol, 2012. 736 : p. 3-17. 30. Lill, D., et al., Mapping connections in signaling networks with ambiguous modularity. NPJ Syst Biol Appl, 2019. 5: p. 19. 31. Goelzer, A. and V. Fromion, Resource allocation in living organisms. Biochem Soc Trans, 2017. 

45 (4): p. 945-952. 32. Yizhak, K., et al., Integrating quantitative proteomics and metabolomics with a genome-scale metabolic network model. Bioinformatics, 2010. 26 (12): p. i255-60. 33. Lakrisenko, P. and D. Weindl, Dynamic models for metabolomics data integration. Current Opinion in Systems Biology, 2021. 28 : p. 100358. 34. Saez-Rodriguez, J., et al., Automatic decomposition of kinetic models of signaling networks minimizing the retroactivity among modules. Bioinformatics, 2008. 24 (16): p. i213-9. 35. Prado-Velasco, M., Modular dynamics paradigm in biosystems multilevel modeling: Software design and PBPK/PD validation. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 2025. 188 : p. 109856. 36. Montaño-Gutierrez, L.F., et al., Analysing and meta-analysing time-series data of microbial growth and gene expression from plate readers. PLoS Comput Biol, 2022. 18 (5): p. e1010138. 37. Krishnamurthi, V.R., et al., A new analysis method for evaluating bacterial growth with mi-croplate readers. PLoS One, 2021. 16 (1): p. e0245205. 14 38. Kim, M. and I. Tagkopoulos, Data integration and predictive modeling methods for multi-omics datasets. Molecular Omics, 2018. 14 (1): p. 8-25. 39. Prinn, R.G., Development and application of earth system models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013. 110 (supplement_1): p. 3673-3680. 40. Lee, J., et al., Systematic and objective evaluation of Earth system models: PCMDI Metrics Package (PMP) version 3. Geosci. Model Dev., 2024. 17 (9): p. 3919-3948. 41. Banga, J.R. and A.F. Villaverde, Mechanistic dynamic modelling of biological systems: The road ahead. Current Opinion in Systems Biology, 2025. 42 : p. 100553. 42. Sechkar, K., et al., A coarse-grained bacterial cell model for resource-aware analysis and design of synthetic gene circuits. Nature Communications, 2024. 15 (1): p. 1981. 43. Andrews, S.S., H.S. Wiley, and H.M. Sauro, Design patterns of biological cells. Bioessays, 2024. 

46 (3): p. e2300188. 44. Mallavarapu, A., et al., Programming with models: modularity and abstraction provide powerful capabilities for systems biology. J R Soc Interface, 2009. 6(32): p. 257-70. 45. Li, X., et al., Modular deregulation of central carbon metabolism for efficient xylose utilization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nat Commun, 2025. 16 (1): p. 4551. 46. Pan, M., et al., Modular assembly of dynamic models in systems biology. PLoS Comput Biol, 2021. 17 (10): p. e1009513. 47. Petersen, B.K., G.E. Ropella, and C.A. Hunt, Toward modular biological models: defining analog modules based on referent physiological mechanisms. BMC Syst Biol, 2014. 8: p. 95. 48. Del Vecchio, D., A.J. Dy, and Y. Qian, Control theory meets synthetic biology. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 2016. 13 (120). 49. Wu, S., et al., Recent Advances in Mass Spectrometry-Based Protein Interactome Studies. 

Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 2025. 24 (1): p. 100887. 50. Chatterjee, A., et al., Improving the generalizability of protein-ligand binding predictions with AI-Bind. Nat Commun, 2023. 14 (1): p. 1989. 51. Dörig, C., et al., Global profiling of protein complex dynamics with an experimental library of protein interaction markers. Nature Biotechnology, 2025. 43 (9): p. 1562-1576. 52. Kadelka, C., et al., Modularity of biological systems: a link between structure and function. JR Soc Interface, 2023. 20 (207): p. 20230505. 53. Klingenberg, C.P., Studying morphological integration and modularity at multiple levels: con-cepts and analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 2014. 369 (1649): p. 20130249. 54. Masison, J., et al., A modular computational framework for medical digital twins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2021. 118 (20). 55. Agmon, E., et al., Vivarium: an interface and engine for integrative multiscale modeling in computational biology. Bioinformatics, 2022. 38 (7): p. 1972-1979. 56. Schaffer, L.V. and T. Ideker, Mapping the multiscale structure of biological systems. Cell Systems, 2021. 12 (6): p. 622-635. 15 57. van Aalst, M., et al., MxlPy—Python package for mechanistic learning and hybrid modelling in life science. Bioinformatics Advances, 2025. 5(1): p. vbaf294. 58. Johnson, J.A.I., et al., Human interpretable grammar encodes multicellular systems biology models to democratize virtual cell laboratories. Cell, 2025. 188 (17): p. 4711-4733.e37. 59. Lewis, N.E., H. Nagarajan, and B.O. Palsson, Constraining the metabolic genotype–phenotype relationship using a phylogeny of in silico methods. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 2012. 10 (4): p. 291-305. 60. Passi, A., et al., Genome-Scale Metabolic Modeling Enables In-Depth Understanding of Big Data. Metabolites, 2021. 12 (1). 61. Bordbar, A., et al., Constraint-based models predict metabolic and associated cellular functions. 

Nat Rev Genet, 2014. 15 (2): p. 107-20. 62. Kerkhoven, E.J., Advances in constraint-based models: methods for improved predictive power based on resource allocation constraints. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 2022. 68 : p. 102168. 63. Chen, Y. and J. Nielsen, Energy metabolism controls phenotypes by protein efficiency and allocation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2019. 116 (35): p. 17592-17597. 64. Li, F., et al., Deep learning-based kcat prediction enables improved enzyme-constrained model reconstruction. Nature Catalysis, 2022. 5(8): p. 662-672. 65. Philipps, M., N. Schmid, and J. Hasenauer, Current state and open problems in universal differential equations for systems biology. NPJ Syst Biol Appl, 2025. 11 (1): p. 101. 66. Joslin, E.J., et al., Structure of the EGF receptor transactivation circuit integrates multiple signals with cell context. Mol Biosyst, 2010. 6(7): p. 1293-306. 67. Taylor, R.C., et al., Changes in translational efficiency is a dominant regulatory mechanism in the environmental response of bacteria. Integrative Biology, 2013. 5(11): p. 1393-1406. 68. Ma, J., et al., Using deep learning to model the hierarchical structure and function of a cell. 

Nat Methods, 2018. 15 (4): p. 290-298. 69. Hucka, M., et al., Promoting Coordinated Development of Community-Based Information Standards for Modeling in Biology: The COMBINE Initiative. Front Bioeng Biotechnol, 2015. 3:p. 19. 70. Singla, J. and K.L. White, A community approach to whole-cell modeling. Current Opinion in Systems Biology, 2021. 26 : p. 33-38. 71. Keating, S.M., et al., SBML Level 3: an extensible format for the exchange and reuse of biological models. Mol Syst Biol, 2020. 16 (8): p. e9110. 72. Mogilner, A., R. Wollman, and W.F. Marshall, Quantitative Modeling in Cell Biology: What Is It Good for? Developmental Cell, 2006. 11 (3): p. 279-287. 73. Tummler, K., et al., New types of experimental data shape the use of enzyme kinetics for dynamic network modeling. FEBS J, 2014. 281 (2): p. 549-71. 74. Sahin, A., D.R. Weilandt, and V. Hatzimanikatis, Optimal enzyme utilization suggests that concentrations and thermodynamics determine binding mechanisms and enzyme saturations. Nat Commun, 2023. 14 (1): p. 2618. 16 75. Leek, J.T., et al., Tackling the widespread and critical impact of batch effects in high-throughput data. Nat Rev Genet, 2010. 11 (10): p. 733-9. 76. Park, J.M., T.Y. Kim, and S.Y. Lee, Prediction of metabolic fluxes by incorporating genomic context and flux-converging pattern analyses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2010. 107 (33): p. 14931-6. 77. Ferreira, M.A.M., W.B.D. Silveira, and Z. Nikoloski, Protein constraints in genome-scale metabolic models: Data integration, parameter estimation, and prediction of metabolic phenotypes. 

Biotechnol Bioeng, 2024. 121 (3): p. 915-930. 78. Sielemann, K., A. Hafner, and B. Pucker, The reuse of public datasets in the life sciences: potential risks and rewards. PeerJ, 2020. 8: p. e9954. 79. Gruber, C.H., et al., Systematic identification of allosteric effectors in Escherichia coli metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2025. 122 (10): p. e2423767122. 80. Peng, H., et al., Ligand interaction landscape of transcription factors and essential enzymes in E. coli. Cell, 2025. 188 (5): p. 1441-1455 e15. 81. Zhang, J., et al., Combining mechanistic and machine learning models for predictive engineering and optimization of tryptophan metabolism. Nature Communications, 2020. 11 (1): p. 4880. 82. Sarker, I.H., AI-Based Modeling: Techniques, Applications and Research Issues Towards Au-tomation, Intelligent and Smart Systems. SN Comput Sci, 2022. 3(2): p. 158. 83. Alseekh, S., et al., Mass spectrometry-based metabolomics: a guide for annotation, quantification and best reporting practices. Nat Methods, 2021. 18 (7): p. 747-756. 84. Buergel, T., et al., Metabolomic profiles predict individual multidisease outcomes. Nat Med, 2022. 28 (11): p. 2309-2320. 85. Meier, F., et al., diaPASEF: parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation combined with data-independent acquisition. Nat Methods, 2020. 17 (12): p. 1229-1236. 86. Mann, M., et al., The Coming Age of Complete, Accurate, and Ubiquitous Proteomes. Molecular Cell, 2013. 49 (4): p. 583-590. 87. Wenk, D., et al., Recent developments in mass-spectrometry-based targeted proteomics of clinical cancer biomarkers. Clin Proteomics, 2024. 21 (1): p. 6. 88. Gao, S., et al., Empowering biomedical discovery with AI agents. Cell, 2024. 187 (22): p. 6125-6151. 89. Driscoll, M.K. and A. Zaritsky, Data science in cell imaging. J Cell Sci, 2021. 134 (7). 90. Hajnajafi, K. and M.A. Iqbal, Mass-spectrometry based metabolomics: an overview of workflows, strategies, data analysis and applications. Proteome Sci, 2025. 23 (1): p. 5. 91. Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya, NIH funding and the pursuit of edge science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2020. 117 (22): p. 12011-12016. 92. von Meijenfeldt, F.A.B., P. Hogeweg, and B.E. Dutilh, A social niche breadth score reveals niche range strategies of generalists and specialists. Nature Ecology & Evolution, 2023. 7(5): p. 768-781. 93. McClure, R., et al., Interaction Networks Are Driven by Community-Responsive Phenotypes in a Chitin-Degrading Consortium of Soil Microbes. mSystems, 2022. 7(5): p. e00372-22. 17 94. Mahilkar, A., et al., Experimental Evolution of Anticipatory Regulation in Escherichia coli. 

Front Microbiol, 2021. 12 : p. 796228. 95. Mao, J., et al., Relieving metabolic burden to improve robustness and bioproduction by industrial microorganisms. Biotechnology Advances, 2024. 74 : p. 108401. 96. Gottschalk, U., K. Brorson, and A.A. Shukla, The need for innovation in biomanufacturing. 

Nat Biotechnol, 2012. 30 (6): p. 489-92. 97. Mitchell, A., et al., Adaptive prediction of environmental changes by microorganisms. Nature, 2009. 460 (7252): p. 220-224. 98. Olsson, L., et al., Robustness: linking strain design to viable bioprocesses. Trends in Biotech-nology, 2022. 40 (8): p. 918-931. 99. Moult, J., et al., A large-scale experiment to assess protein structure prediction methods. 

Proteins, 1995. 23 (3): p. ii-v. 100. Kryshtafovych, A., et al., Critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction (CASP)—Round XV. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 2023. 91 (12): p. 1539-1549. 101. Eyring, V., et al., Overview of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) experimental design and organization. Geosci. Model Dev., 2016. 9(5): p. 1937-1958. 102. Launius, R.D., The National Labs: Science in an American System, 1947–1974. By Peter J. Westwick. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003. xii, 403 pp. $49.95, isbn 0-674-00948-7.). 

Journal of American History, 2004. 91 (1): p. 303-304. 18