Title: Identifying bubble-like subgraphs in linear-time via a unified SPQR-tree framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08071v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:55:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 57

Markdown Content:
# Identifying bubble-like subgraphs in linear-time via a unified SPQR-tree framework 

Francisco Sena ∗1, Aleksandr Politov ∗1, Corentin Moumard 1,2 , Massimo Cairo 1, Romeo Rizzi 3, Manuel Cáceres †4, Sebastian Schmidt †1, Juha Harviainen †1, and Alexandru I. Tomescu †11Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 

{francisco.sena,aleksandr.politov, sebastian.schmidt,juha.harviainen,alexandru.tomescu}@helsinki.fi 

> 2

ENS Lyon, Lyon, France, corentin.moumard@ens-lyon.fr 

> 3

Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, romeo.rizzi@univr.it 

> 4

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, manuel.caceres@aalto.fi 

Abstract 

A fundamental algorithmic problem in computational biology is to find all subgraphs of a given type— superbubbles , snarls , and ultrabubbles —in a directed or bi directed input graph. Such bubble-like subgraphs correspond to regions of genetic variation, whose identification is useful in analyzing collections of genomes (a pangenome graph ). At present, all subgraphs of the latter two types can only be found in quadratic time, which constitutes a major bottleneck for applications involving massive inputs. Although all superbubbles can be identified in linear time, the existing algorithm is highly specialized and the result of a long sequence of tailored developments. In this work, we present the first linear-time algorithms for identifying all snarls and all ul-trabubbles, resolving problems that have remained open since 2018. Additionally, the algorithm for snarls relies on a new linear-size representation of all snarls with respect to the number of vertices in the graph. For the first time in this context, we make use of the well-known SPQR-tree decomposition, which encodes all 2-separators of a biconnected graph. By perform-ing several dynamic-programming–style traversals of this tree, we maintain key properties (such as acyclicity) that allow us to decide whether a given 2-separator defines a subgraph to be reported. A crucial ingredient for achieving linear-time complexity is the observation that the acyclicity of linearly many subgraphs can be tested simultaneously via a reduction to the classical problem of computing all arcs in a directed graph whose removal renders it acyclic (so-called feedback arcs ). As such, we prove a fundamental result for bidirected graphs, that may be of independent interest: all feedback arcs can be computed in linear time for tipless bidirected graphs, while in general graphs the problem is at least as hard as matrix multiplication, assuming the k-Clique Conjecture. Altogether, our results form a unified framework that also yields a completely different linear-time algorithm for finding all superbubbles. Although some of the results are technically involved, the underlying ideas are conceptually simple, and may extend to other bubble-like subgraphs. More broadly, our work contributes to the theoretical foundations of computational biology 

and advances a growing line of research that uses SPQR-tree decompositions as a general tool for designing efficient algorithms, beyond their traditional role in graph drawing. 

> ∗

These authors contributed equally. 

> †

These authors jointly supervised this work. 

i

> arXiv:2604.08071v1 [cs.DS] 9 Apr 2026

# Contents 

1 Introduction 1

1.1 Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.2 Existing bubble-finding algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.3 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.4 Organization of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

2 Preliminaries 3

2.1 Undirected graphs and connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32.2 Bidirected and directed graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42.3 Block-cut trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.4 SPQR trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

3 Overview of our results and techniques 8

3.1 Bubble-like subgraphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.2 Superbubbles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.3 Snarls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.4 Ultrabubbles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 

4 Superbubbles 13 

4.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 4.2 Algorithm - Phase 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 4.3 Algorithm - Phase 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 4.4 Algorithm - Phase 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 4.5 The superbubble finding algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

5 Snarls 27 

5.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 5.2 Sign-cut graphs and dangling blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 5.3 Properties of snarls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 5.4 The snarl finding algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 

6 Ultrabubbles 40 

6.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 6.2 The ultrabubble finding algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 6.3 Feedback edges in bidirected graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

Acknowledgements 45 References 49 

ii 1 Introduction 

1.1 Background and motivation 

Recent bioinformatics applications in pangenomics are concerned with building a single massive graph representing many genomes in a population. For example, the Human Pangenome Reference Consortium (HPRC) (Liao et al., 2023) released in May 2025 a pangenome graph created from 232 individual genomes, 1 which contains over 206 million edges (Bhat et al., 2025). The size of such graphs is expected to significantly increase in the future. For example, HPRC is planning to release in Summer 2026 a larger graph created from 350 individual genomes, 2 and there are other initiatives worldwide aiming to construct such graphs from many more human genomes, such as the European “1+ Million Genomes” initiative. 3

An advantage of pangenome graphs is that genetic variation translates into local substructures, with clean graph-theoretic characterizations, that can be found and analyzed for biological meaning. One of the most used type of such subgraph of a directed graph is a superbubble (Onodera et al., 2013; Dabbaghie et al., 2022), see Figure 1(a). A superbubble is an acyclic subgraph B identified by two endpoint vertices, say s and t, such that s is the only source of B and s does not have out-neighbors outside of B; and symmetrically, t is the only sink of B and t does not have in-neighbors outside of B. Additionally, there are no other edges from B to the rest of the graph, and a minimality property is also imposed to ensure overall a linear number of superbubbles. See also (Kolmogorov et al., 2020; Rautiainen et al., 2023; Minkin and Medvedev, 2020; Shafin et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2018) for other applications of superbubbles. The development of pangenome graphs led to the introduction of generalizations of super-bubbles, to explicitly handle the bi directed nature of the graphs that arises from the reverse-complementary symmetry of DNA. In a bidirected graph 4, every edge also carries a sign + or −

at each endpoint. For example, between two vertices u and v there can be four bidirected edges: 

{u−, v −} , {u−, v +}, {u+, v −} and {u+, v +} (as unordered pairs). A vertex v together with a sign + or − is called a vertex-side (Rahman and Medvedev, 2022a). Directed graphs are a special case of bidirected graphs: every directed edge (u, v ) is encoded as {u+, v −} . Bidirected graphs are heavily used in bioinformatics, and we refer the reader to e.g. (Bessouf et al., 2019; Medvedev et al., 2007; Kita, 2017; Rahman and Medvedev, 2022a) for further motivation on bidirected graphs. In bidirected graphs, the most well-known bubble-like notions are snarls (see Figure 1(b)) and 

ultrabubbles (see Figure 1(d)), introduced by Paten et al. (2018). At a high level, a snarl is a minimal connected subgraph identified by two vertex-sides that separate its interior from the rest of the graph; moreover, at each of the two endpoints, all vertex-sides of one sign lie inside the snarl and all vertex-sides of the opposite sign lie outside. Ultrabubbles are snarls whose interior contains no tip and is acyclic , i.e. it contains no closed bidirected walk . A tip is a generalization of a source/sink in directed graphs: it is a vertex v for which all incident edges carry the same sign at v. A bidirected walk alternates the sign at every internal vertex; it is closed if it starts and ends at the same vertex, at which it does not need to alternate sign. We also call such a walk a cycloid .See also (Garrison et al., 2018; Hickey et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Chang et al., 2020; Sirén et al., 2021, 2024) for important applications of snarls and ultrabubbles. 

> 1https://humanpangenome.org/hprc-data-release-2/
> 2https://humanpangenome.org/release-timeline/
> 3https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/1-million-genomes
> 4Bidirected graphs, though not as widely known, are well represented in the literature; see e.g. (Gabow, 1983) (STOC 1983) and (Schrijver et al., 2003, Chapter 36).

1Figure 1: Examples of superbubbles (a), snarls (b), and ultrabubbles (d) in directed graphs and bidirected graphs, with the extremities of the bubbles highlighted in the same color. The superbubbles are (c, b ) and (b, e ), the snarls are                            

> {a+, b −} ,{a+, c −} ,{b−, c −} ,{b+, e +},{d+, f −} , and {d−, f +}, and the ultrabubbles are {b−, c −} and {b+, e +}.Subfigure (c) illustrates splitting vertex sides d+and f−from (b), after which dand fare in the same connected component that is distinct from the component of d′and f′. Note that all pairs of a+,b−, and c−form snarls in (b), whereas with superbubbles and ultrabubbles each vertex-side can be an extremity of only a single bubble.

1.2 Existing bubble-finding algorithms 

Given a directed graph (V, E ), the first superbubble finding 5 algorithm ran in time O(|V |(|E| +

|V |)) (Onodera et al., 2013), and was later improved to O(log |V |(|E| + |V |)) -time (Sung et al., 2015). Linear time O(|V | + |E|) was first achieved for acyclic graphs by Brankovic et al. (2016), then for general graphs by Gärtner et al. (2018), and further simplified by Gärtner and Stadler (2019). Despite the massive size of pangenome graphs, existing worst-case bounds for these bidirected structures are far from linear: snarls can be computed in O(|V || E|) time in the worst case, and ultrabubbles in O(( |V | + |E|)2) time (Paten et al., 2018). Another intrinsic difficulty is output size, as the total number of snarls can be quadratic in the number of vertices. Paten et al. (2018) therefore used the cactus graph (Paten et al., 2011) to prune snarls and compute in linear time a 

snarl decomposition of linear size. However, because of their possible biological significance, we are interested in identifying all bubble-like structures in the graph. Zisis and Sætrom (2026) recently proposed an algorithm which, given a set of k snarls, can verify in time O(k|V | + ( |V | + |E|)) which ones are ultrabubbles. Finally, Harviainen et al. (2026) showed that ultrabubbles can be computed in linear time on the special class of bidirected graphs that either contain a tip or their underlying undirected graph contains a cutvertex. This is based on transforming any bidirected graph in this class into a directed graph which is at most of double size, such that the ultrabubbles of the bidirected graph correspond exactly to (a slight generalization of) superbubbles in the directed graph. However, note that this reduction does not work in general. Despite the similarities between the several existing bubble-like structures (see also e.g. bibub-bles (Li et al., 2024), panbubbles (Bhat et al., 2025), and flubbles (Mwaniki et al., 2024)), there is no unified methodology for efficiently computing them. Moreover, since superbubbles can indeed be computed in linear time, it would seem reasonable to assume that such an approach can be adapted also for snarls. However, this achievement is heavily tailored to superbubbles and crucially relies on the directed nature of the input graph. Finally, this result has been obtained only after a series of papers (Onodera et al., 2013; Sung et al., 2015; Brankovic et al., 2016; Gärtner et al., 2018; Gärtner and Stadler, 2019), begging the question of how large undertaking obtaining a linear-time snarl or ultrabubble identification algorithm is. 

> 5The interior of a bubble is uniquely identified by its endpoints, and thus bubble-finding algorithms compute the set of pairs of endpoint vertices of all bubbles of a certain type. In fact, since bubble subgraphs can contain smaller bubble subgraphs, one cannot obtain linear-time algorithms if the full subgraphs are reported in output.

21.3 Contributions 

In this paper we show that all snarls and all ultrabubbles can be identified in linear time in the size of the graph, solving problems that have been open since 2018. For snarls, we further prove that the set of all snarls admits a representation of size linear in the number of vertices of the input graph, which can itself be constructed in linear time. Thus, we can identify all snarls in time linear in the input size. We obtain both algorithms via a unified framework for finding these structures. This framework also yields a new linear-time algorithm for computing all superbubbles in directed graphs. The key insight underlying our approach is that the two endpoints of a bubble subgraph form a 2-separator (i.e. 2-vertex cut) in the underlying undirected graph, except for special cases which we can handle separately. We then leverage classical decomposition machinery for 2-separators, namely the SPQR tree of a (bi)connected graph (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1990a; Gutwenger and Mutzel, 2001), which compactly encodes all its 2-separators. While SPQR trees have been used in bioinformatics in other contexts (e.g. (Fedarko, 2017; Jafarzadeh et al., 2025)), they have not been used to algorithmically capture bubble-like structures. More broadly, although SPQR trees are most commonly associated with graph embedding and drawing applications (Mutzel, 2003), our work contributes to a growing line of research that employs them to design efficient algorithms. For example, recognizing if a graph belongs to a certain class (de Macedo Filho et al., 2018), or constructing efficient indexing schemes for e.g. shortest-path queries (Maniu et al., 2017). Although some of the results are technically involved, the underlying ideas are conceptually simple. This suggests that the same framework may extend to other bubble-like notions, such as bibubbles (Li et al., 2024) and panbubbles (Bhat et al., 2025), for which linear-time algorithms are currently unknown. 

1.4 Organization of the paper 

In Section 2 we introduce key technical notions, and in Section 3 we give an extended overview of our main ideas. To better illustrate our framework, we first apply it to standard directed graphs and present the new linear-time superbubble algorithm, in Section 4. Our goal in the presentation is to illustrate the key ideas, which we can then adapt to the more involved case of bidirected graphs. We show the linear-time snarl algorithm in Section 5, and the results on ultrabubbles in Section 6. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Many of our results are based on analyzing the underlying undirected graph of the (bi)directed graph we wish to find superbubbles, ultrabubbles, or snarls. We begin by giving preliminaries on undirected graphs and basic terminology on connectivity. Then we introduce terminology for bidirected and directed graphs. 

2.1 Undirected graphs and connectivity 

Let H = ( V, E ) be an undirected graph with vertex set V (H) and edge set E(H). Let u, v ∈ V (H)

be vertices. If H has an edge with endpoints u and v then we denote that edge as {u, v } (parallel edges are allowed). A u-v undirected walk in H is a standard walk between u and v; a u-v undirected path is a u-v undirected walk without repeated vertices. The internal vertices of a u-v undirected 3path are the vertices contained in the path except u and v. (When clear from the context, we simply say “path” instead of undirected “path”.) A subgraph H of G is maximal w.r.t. a given property if no proper supergraph of H contained in G has that property. The subgraph induced by a subset C ⊆ V (G), E (G) of vertices or edges of G is denoted by G[C]. The vertex-induced subgraph is the graph with vertex set C and the subset of edges in E(G) whose endpoints are in C. The edge-induced subgraph has edge set C and a vertex set consisting of all endpoints of edges in C. If G′ = ( V ′, E ′) is an undirected graph, then 

G′ ∪ G := ( V ∪ V ′, E ∪ E′).Graph H is disconnected if it has two vertices without a path between them. Graph H is k-connected if it has more than k vertices and no subset of fewer than k vertices disconnects the graph. By Menger’s theorem (Menger, 1927), if a graph H is k-connected then H has k internally vertex-disjoint paths between any two of its vertices. A component of H is a maximally (1-)connected subgraph. Vertex v is a cutvertex of H if H −v has more components than H; if H has no cutvertex then it is biconnected . The vertex pair {u, v } is a separation pair of H if (H − u) − v has more components than H; if H has no separation pairs then it is triconnected . Notice that we allow biconnected (resp. triconnected) graphs to have fewer than three (resp. four) vertices. We call an edge a bridge if its removal increases the number of components of the graph; a set of at least two parallel edges whose removal increases the number of components of the graph is called a multi-bridge . If every u-v path contains vertex w̸ = u, v then w is a u-v cutvertex. A separation of H is a pair of vertex sets (A, B ) such that V = A ∪ B, A \ B and B \ A are nonempty, and there is no edge between A \ B and B \ A. A maximal set of vertices X ⊆ V (H) with |X| ≥ k such that no two vertices of X can be separated by removing fewer than k other vertices is called a k-block .

2.2 Bidirected and directed graphs 

A bidirected graph G = ( V, E ) has a set of vertices V = V (G) and a set of bidirected edges E = E(G).A sign is an element in α ∈ { +, −} , and the opposite sign ˆα of α is defined as ˆ− = + and ˆ+ = −. A pair (v, α ) where v ∈ V (G) and α ∈ { +, −} is a vertex-side ,6 which we concisely write as vα , e.g. v+

or v−. A bidirected edge e ∈ E(G) is an unordered pair of vertex-sides {uα, vβ } (for simplicity we may refer to bidirected edges as just edges); we say that e is incident to u (resp. v) with sign α

(resp. β), that G has a vertex-side of sign α in u, and that u and v are the endpoints of e. The set of vertex-sides of G is the set ⋃ 

> e∈E(G)

e. A bidirected graph H is a subgraph of G if V (H) ⊆ V (G)

and E(H) ⊆ E(G), and write H ⊆ G. The set of out-neighbors of v is denoted as N + 

> G

(v) and consists of the vertices x for which there is an edge {v+, xβ } in G (the set of in-neighbors is defined analogously). We say that a vertex v is a tip in G if no two edges of G are incident to v with different signs. The undirected graph of G is denoted by U (G) and is obtained from G by ignoring the signs in its vertex-sides, and keeping parallel edges that possibly appear (edges are thus labeled with unique identifiers that are retained during the conversion). A bidirected walk W is a sequence {v1α1, v 2α2}, {v2 ˆα2, v 3α3}, . . . , {vk−1 ˆαk−1, v kαk} ∈ E(G).We also say that W is a v1-vk bidirected walk (also a v1α1-vkαk, a v1-vkαk, or a v1α1-vk bidirected walk). When clear from the context we may say simply “walk” instead of “bidirected walk”. Vertices 

x and y are the first and last vertices of the walk, respectively, and all remaining vertices are its 

internal vertices. Observe that to any walk W we can associate its reversed walk (i.e., walks in bidirected graphs have two possible orientations). A bidirected path is a walk without repeated  

> 6We adopt this nomenclature from (Rahman and Medvedev, 2022b) and note that (Kita, 2017) opts for “signed vertex”. We remark that our definition of bidirected graph, while appropriate for this work, differs from commonly used definitions (e.g., (Kita, 2017; Ghorbani et al., 2025; Bessouf et al., 2019; Ando et al., 1996; Schrijver et al., 2003)) although all are essentially equivalent.

4vertices. A cycloid is a path with the exception that the first and last vertex are the same and where at most one of its vertices (called the exceptional vertex ) has the same sign over the two edges incident to it in the sequence. A graph with no cycloid is acyclic .When every edge of G has one vertex-side with a + sign and the other with a − sign then we can say that G is a directed graph where a bidirected edge {u+, v −} is seen as a directed edge from 

u to v, which we concisely denote as uv . A directed path is a sequence of vertices v1 . . . v k such that vivi+1 ∈ E(G) for i = 1 , . . . , k − 1, in which case we also say that v1 reaches vk in G or that this sequence is a v1-vk directed path . A vertex v is a source of G if |N − 

> G

(v)| = 0 and a sink if 

|N + 

> G

(v)| = 0 . A vertex v is an extremity of G if v is a source or sink of G, or a cutvertex of U (G).

2.3 Block-cut trees 

Let H = ( V, E ) be an undirected connected graph with at least two vertices. It follows from the definition of k-block that a subgraph induced by a 2-block is a maximal connected subgraph without cutvertices (see (Diestel, 2025)). For simplicity, we will refer to the subgraphs induced by 2-blocks simply as blocks. The block-cut tree of H is a tree with node set N and edge set A. A node is a 

block node , which is either a maximal 2-connected subgraph or a multi-bridge of H, or a cutnode ,which is a cutvertex of H.The edges in A represent how the blocks of H interact via the cutvertices of H as follows. Let 

v be a cutvertex of H and let μ be the cutnode of N corresponding to v. Then H − v consists of components C1, . . . , C ℓ (ℓ ≥ 2) and μ has ℓ neighbours in the tree, each corresponding to the block contained in H[V (Ci) + v] that meets v. The blocks partition the edge set of H (Diestel, 2025) and there is at most one block containing any two vertices. 

2.4 SPQR trees 

SPQR trees represent the decomposition of a biconnected graph according to its separation pairs in a tree-like way, thus exposing the 3-blocks of the graph (analogously to cutvertices and blocks in block-cut trees). They were first formally defined by Tamassia and Di Battista (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1990a), but were informally known before (Lane, 1937; Hopcroft and Tarjan, 1973a; Bienstock and Monma, 1988). They can be constructed in linear time (Hopcroft and Tarjan, 1973a; Gutwenger and Mutzel, 2001), and if unrooted they are unique (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1990a). SPQR trees are a valuable tool in the design of algorithms for different problems (Holm et al., 2018; Di Battista and Tamassia, 1996b, 1990b). The definition of SPQR trees given in this paper is essentially the same given by Di Battista and Tamassia in (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1990a, 1996a,b); note that the exact same recursive definition is used in (Gutwenger and Mutzel, 2001; Gutwenger et al., 2005) (for a non-recursive definition see (Holm et al., 2018)). We remark that our definition contains some minor technical adjustments to the definition of Di Battista and Tamassia. To define SPQR trees we need some basic definitions. Let H be an undirected biconnected graph with at least two edges. A split pair of H is a separation pair or an edge of H. A split component of a split pair {u, v } is an edge {u, v } or a maximal subgraph C of H containing the vertices u and v such that {u, v } is not a split pair of C. Let {s, t } be a split pair of H. A maximal split pair {u, v } of H with respect to {s, t } is such that for any other split pair {u′, v ′} vertices 

u, v, s , and t are in the same split component of {u′, v ′}.Fix an arbitrary edge e = {s, t } ∈ E(H), called the reference edge . The SPQR tree T of H with respect to e is defined as a rooted tree with nodes of four types: S (series), P (parallel), Q (single edge), and R (rigid). Each node μ in T has an associated biconnected graph skeleton( μ), called the 

skeleton of μ with V (skeleton( μ)) ⊆ V (H). The tree T is recursively defined as follows: 5Figure 2: A directed graph (left) and the SPQR tree of its (biconnected) underlying undirected graph (right). Virtual edges are dashed, tree edges (in blue) connect pairs of virtual edges in adjacent tree nodes, and node types (S, P, R) are shown in blue. We highlight in red a virtual edge eν and show its expansion( eν ) in the red box. The skeleton( μ)                          

> of the tree node μ(the top-most node) is shown in the blue box. The directed skeleton skeleton *(μ)is a directed graph obtained from skeleton( μ)where real edges are directed as in the input directed graph, and for each e={s, t }
> in skeleton( μ)we add an edge from sto t(and from tto s) if sreaches t(or treaches s, resp.).

Trivial case: If H consists of exactly two parallel edges between s and t, then T consists of a single Q-node whose skeleton is H itself. 

Parallel case: If the split pair e = {s, t } has exactly k + 1 ≥ 3 split components H0, . . . , H k where 

H0 denotes the split component containing e, then the root of T is a P-node μ whose skeleton consists of k + 1 parallel edges e0, . . . , e k between s and t with e0 = e.

Series case: Otherwise the split pair {s, t } has exactly two split components, where one is e

trivially and the other let us denote by H′. If H′ is a sequence of blocks H1, . . . , H k separated by cutvertices c1, . . . , c k−1 (k ≥ 2) in this order from s to t, then the root of T is an S-node 

μ whose skeleton is a cycle e0, e 1, ..., e k where e0 = e, c0 = s, ck = t, and ei = ( ci−1, c i)(i = 1 , . . . , k ).

Rigid case: If none of the previous cases applies, let {s1, t 1}, . . . , {sk, t k} be the maximal split pairs of H with respect to {s, t } (k ≥ 1) , and, for i = 1 , . . . , k let Hi be the union of all the split components of {si, t i} except the one containing e. The root of T is an R-node μ whose skeleton is obtained from H by replacing each subgraph Hi with the edge ei = {si, t i}.Except for the trivial case, μ has children μ1, . . . , μ k, such that μi is the root of the SPQR tree of 

Hi ∪ ei with respect to ei for i = 1 , . . . , k . Notice how the (reference) edge ei in skeleton( μi) ensures that skeleton( μi) is biconnected (e.g., in the case of the S-node). Once the recursion terminates, we add a Q-node with vertex set {s, t } representing the first reference edge e = {s, t } and make it a child of the root of T . Node μi is associated with edge ei of the skeleton of its parent μ,called the virtual edge of μi in skeleton( μ) ( i = 1 , . . . , k ). Conversely, μ is implicitly associated with the reference edge ei in skeleton( μi). Notice that reference and virtual edges encode the same information: two subgraphs of H and how they attach to each other. Indeed, a reference edge of 6some node is just another virtual edge with the additional property of pointing to the parent of that node. We say that μ is the pertinent node of ei ∈ E(skeleton( μi)) (or that ei ∈ E(skeleton( μi)) 

pertains to μ), and that μi is the pertinent node of ei ∈ E(skeleton( μ)) (or that ei ∈ E(skeleton( μ)) 

pertains to μi). 

Additional definitions. For simplicity, we will omit Q-nodes from the SPQR tree. This amounts to replacing every virtual edge pertaining to a Q-node by a real edge and removing every Q-node from the tree. The edges of a skeleton are then either real or virtual. Suppose now that ν is the parent of μ in T . Let eν ∈ skeleton( μ) be the edge pertaining to 

ν and let eμ ∈ skeleton( ν) be the edge pertaining to μ. Let {s, t } be the endpoints of eν and eμ.Deleting the edge {ν, μ } from T disconnects T into two subtrees, Tν containing ν and Tμ containing 

μ. The expansion graph of eν , denoted as expansion( eν ), is the subgraph induced in H by the real edges contained in the skeletons of the nodes in Tν . The graph expansion( eμ) is defined analogously with respect to Tμ. The expansion of a real edge is the graph consisting of that edge alone. Each edge of T (importantly, without Q-nodes) encodes a separation of H (i.e., 

(V (expansion( eν )) , V (expansion( eμ))) is a separation of H). Further, we have V (expansion( eν )) ∩

V (expansion( eμ)) = V (skeleton( ν)) ∩ V (skeleton( μ)) = {s, t } and expansion( eν ) ∪ expansion( eμ) = 

H. For every node μ of T whose skeleton has edge set {e1, . . . , e k}, the graph ⋃ki=1 expansion( ei)

is exactly H. In SPQR trees no two S-nodes and no two P-nodes are adjacent (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1996b). The next two statements are well known results about SPQR trees. Lemma 2 below is given in a context where Q-nodes are part of the tree. Clearly, removing Q-nodes maintains the bounds. 

Lemma 1 (SPQR trees and separation/split pairs) . Let H be an undirected 2-connected graph and let T be its SPQR trees with Q-nodes omitted. For each S-node μ of T , let Xμ denote the set of all pairs of nonadjacent vertices in skeleton( μ). Then the union of the virtual edges over the skeletons of the nodes of T together with the union of all the Xμ is exactly the set of separation pairs of H.If Q-nodes are included in the tree, then this union is exactly the set of split pairs of H.

Lemma 2 (SPQR trees require linear space (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1990b)) . Let H = ( V, E )

be an undirected biconnected graph. The SPQR tree T of H has O(|V (H)|) nodes and the total number of edges in the skeletons is O(|E(H)|).

The next simple result is merely technical and will be used throughout in the paper. 

Lemma 3. Let G be a bidirected graph, H be a 2-connected subgraph of G, and T be the SPQR tree of H. Let μ be a node of T , e = {u, v } be a virtual edge of skeleton( μ), and a ∈ V (H) \ { u} be a vertex. If a ∈ V (expansion( e)) then expansion( e) has an a-v path avoiding u.Proof. If a = v we are done, so a̸ = v. Suppose for a contradiction that every a-v path in 

expansion( e) contains u. Since a is contained in a split component of {u, v }, every a-v path in H

also contains u. So u is an a-v cutvertex in H, contradicting the fact that H is 2-connected. 

A remark on notation. To simplify the writing we will refer to connectivity properties of the underlying undirected graph of a bidirected graph by saying that the bidirected graph itself has the property, as to minimize the use of the cumbersome notation U (G). For instance, if G is a bidirected graph such that U (G) is 2-connected and where x is a u-v cutvertex, then we say that G

is 2-connected and that x is a u-v cutvertex with the meaning that U (G) has those properties. The only possible ambiguity arising from this choice is on the notion of “walk”. For that, we carefully specify what kind of walk we are referring to by using the terms “(bi)directed” and “undirected” as 7they were defined previously; only when it is clear from the context, we allow ourselves to simply say “walk”. We also build block-cut trees and SPQR trees directly on bidirected graphs (connectivity is seen from their underlying undirected graphs). The edges contained in the blocks of block-cut trees, in the skeletons of the nodes of SPQR trees, in split components, etc, additionally encode their relevant properties in the (bi)directed graph they live in. This applies also to the expansion 

operator in SPQR trees. We will routinely solve subproblems on the skeletons whose edges are assigned directions de-pending on the reachability relation of G restricted to their respective expansions. Formally, let 

μ be a node of T and let e1 = {s1, t 1}, e 2 = {s2, t 2}, . . . , e k = {sk, t k} be the edges of skeleton( μ)(k ≥ 2) . Define the set of directed edges B1 = {siti : si reaches ti in expansion( ei), i = 1 , . . . , k }

and B2 = {tisi : ti reaches si in expansion( ei), i = 1 , . . . , k }. We define the directed skeleton of μ

as skeleton *(μ) := ( V (skeleton( μ)) , B 1 ∪ B2).

# 3 Overview of our results and techniques 

In this section, we will give a high-level description of the results and the techniques behind them. We start by informally defining the bubble-like structures (or just bubbles) we are interested in, as they will be formally defined in Sections 4 to 6, respectively. Next, we give more details on how we handle the bubbles of each type. In this paper we assume that (bi)directed graphs have no parallel edges since they have no effect on superbubbles, ultrabubbles, and snarls (two edges {xα, yβ } and 

{zγ, wδ } are parallel if x = z, α = γ, y = w, and β = δ). 

3.1 Bubble-like subgraphs 

All bubbles we consider are characterized by two vertices u and v that are the “extremities”, or “endpoints“ of the bubble. Intuitively, if one enters a bubble from the outside of the bubble, they have to go through an extremity and similarly exit through an extremity. In other words, the extremities form a 2-separator of the underlying undirected graph in the sense that their removal separates the interior of the bubble from the rest of the graph (except fo special cases which we can handle separately). We actually require a mildly stronger property that is formalized under the notion of splitting , where we pick a vertex v and a direction (for directed graphs) or a vertex-side 

v+ or v− (for bidirected graphs), create a copy v′ of v, and finally detach the edges of the opposing direction/vertex-side from v and reattach them to v′. This is illustrated in Figure 1 (c). We then require that a bubble characterized by the extremities u and v has u and v in the same connected component that is separated from u′ and v′ after splitting u and v. Further, all our bubbles have to be minimal , intuitively meaning that they are not obtainable by concatenating smaller bubbles. 

Snarls are precisely defined by these separability and minimality properties in bidirected graphs, with examples provided in Figure 1 (b)–(c). Snarls are relatively weak bubbles in the sense that they lack any assumptions about their interior such as all internal vertices being reachable from an extremity in (bi)directed sense. In contrast, superbubbles and ultrabubbles require that the component containing u and v after splitting them has no cycloids and that for any internal vertex 

w there is a (bi)directed walk (path, in fact) from one extremity to another that goes through w.Superbubbles and ultrabubbles are illustrated in Figure 1 (a) and (d), respectively. 8Figure 3: Superbubbles, snarls and ultrabubbles in a directed or bidirected graph naturally map to the SPQR tree of their underlying undirected graph. In (a) we have a directed graph with superbubbles (b, d ) (violet) and (e, h ) (green). (Note that also (a, i ) is a superbubble, but since it is the whole graph, it will be handled separately.) In (b) we have a bidirected graph with the same underlying undirected graph as the graph in (a). We have that {b+, d +} (violet),          

> {d−, i +}(yellow) are snarls, that are also ultrabubbles. The pair {b+, i +}is not a snarl because of minimality. The snarl {e+, h +}(green) is not an ultrabubble as it contains a cycloid (purple) in its interior (alternating signs at all vertices except e). In (c) we show the SPQR tree of the underlying undirected graph of these graphs, where the different bubble subgraphs are shown with the same color as in the graphs in (a) and (b). Some snarls, such as the single-edge snarl {h−, i −} do not arise from a 2-separator, but are handled separately when traversing the SPQR tree (in this case, when processing the middle S-node).

3.2 Superbubbles 

Since (nearly all) superbubbles correspond to some 2-separator of the graph, our main technique is to exploit the decomposition of the 2-separators provided by the SPQR tree, encoded by its virtual edges (see Figure 3). For each 2-separator, we need to decide whether the subgraph induced by the vertex set C that the virtual edge points to corresponds to a superbubble, but we also need the other direction of whether the subgraph induced by the complement of C is a superbubble. Most of our efforts in finding superbubbles and ultrabubbles is in computing the required properties in these “two sides” of the separations. (Exceptionally, P-nodes require special treatment since they encode many separations alone, but ultimately do not raise any issues due to their fixed topology.) To solve these problems, we start by observing that the property of the desired walks existing inside the superbubble is equivalently captured by the lack of internal sources and sinks supposing that we know the graph to be acyclic. If the induced subgraph corresponding to some virtual edge contains cycles, sources, or sinks, then so do all of its induced supergraphs. Therefore, we traverse the SPQR tree with depth-first search starting from an arbitrary root r, compute the information for the subgraphs, and finally combine the subresults to deduce the acyclicity and the existence of sources and sinks. For high-level visualization, see Figure 4. To identify superbubbles from this information (and also to identify other bubbles), we then need to perform careful case analysis on how they can manifest in each type of a node of the SPQR tree. 9Figure 4: Phase 1 of the superbubble-finding algorithm (bottom-up DFS traversal of the SPQR tree). In (a), the SPQR tree is shown with an R-node μ having children μ1, μ 2, μ 3 and parent ν. The skeletons are depicted with dotted edges (virtual) and solid edges (real, maintaining the directions in the input directed graph). In this example, the goal is to determine whether s reaches t in expansion( eμ), knowing the reachabilities between the 2-separators               

> {s, a },{a, b }, and {b, t }in the children μ1,μ2, and μ3(in red), respectively. In (b), retrieving these information from the children, each expansion is collapsed into a directed edge in skeleton *(μ)(red arrows). A traversal of this directed skeleton confirms that sreaches t(notice that the algorithm does not require an explicit traversal in order to determine this reachability relation, see Lemma 8).

This procedure identifies the superbubbles for each 2-separator in one direction—in the sepa-rated component without the vertices of r—but not in the other. For that direction, we instead need to know that if we were to remove the subgraph corresponding to the virtual edge, would the remaining subgraph be a superbubble. The main idea here is that if the subgraph corresponding to a virtual edge between u and v is acyclic and has no sources and sinks, then we can “collapse” it into a single arc whose direction is determined by whether all walks in the subgraph go from u to v

or from v to u. If we then collapse all the virtual edges of the node, then identifying the remaining superbubbles reduces to finding the feedback arcs among the collapsed virtual edges, that is, arcs whose removal makes the graph acyclic. Such arcs are computable in linear time in the number of arcs (Garey and Tarjan, 1978), and SPQR trees contain only linearly many virtual edges in the size of the input. The process is illustrated in Figure 5. Consequently, we get a linear-time algorithm for identifying all superbubbles. 

Theorem 1. The superbubbles of a directed graph G can be computed in time O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|).

3.3 Snarls 

Because snarls only require separability and minimality, identifying them with the SPQR tree should intuitively be more straightforward than identifying ultrabubbles. On the other hand, the lack of structural requirements makes it possible for there to be quadratically many of them in the size of the input; this occurs for example in a clique of tips. To solve this issue, we provide a novel characterization of snarls and then provide a concise representation of all snarls based on that, whose size is only linear in the size of the input. We start by identifying a subset of cutvertices of the graph such that the extremities of a snarl cannot be in distinct connected components after splitting of any of them. These cutvertices have a 10 Figure 5: Phase 2 of the superbubble finding algorithm (BFS from the root). The algorithm processes node ν and determines for each neighbor μi whether expansion( eiν ) is acyclic, for i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. The red arrows represent states already computed (due to Phase 1 and the BFS traversal order in Phase 2). The purple region shows expansion( e1    

> ν).To handle all these tree nodes/states in linear-time in the size of skeleton( ν), the feedback-arcs of skeleton *(ν)are computed.

property which we call sign-consistency : a sign-consistent vertex becomes a tip in each component that is created after being split (not necessarily with the same sign in each component). By splitting each of these vertices we obtain a set of disjoint graphs that we call sign-cut graphs , which preserve the set of all original snarls and where every snarl has its extremities in a single sign-cut graph. We then observe that the extremities of each snarl are either (i) a pair of tips or (ii) a pair of non-tips, within a (unique) sign-cut graph. For the snarls of type (i), we compile a list of tips for each sign-cut graph, enabling us to capture a quadratic number of snarls with linear-sized lists. Crucially, there are only linearly many snarls of type (ii), which we find by analyzing the nodes of the SPQR tree. Ultimately, we obtain the next result. 

Theorem 2. Given a bidirected graph G, there exists a representation of the set of all snarls of G

consisting of sets T1, T 2, . . . , T k and S1, S 2, . . . , S ℓ, where 1. each Ti is a set of vertex-sides of G, and any pair of vertex-sides in Ti identifies a snarl of G;2. each Si is a pair of vertex-sides {uα, vβ } identifying a snarl of G;3. ∑ki=1 |Ti| = O(|V (G)|) and ∑ℓi=1 |Si| = O(|V (G)|).Moreover, this representation can be computed in time O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|).

For a concrete example, cutvertex b is sign-consistent in Figure 1 (b). After splitting it, we would get a sign-cut graph with tips a, b, and c and another sign-cut graph with tips b and e. The remaining snarls {d+, f −} and {d−, f +} correspond to a pair of non-tip vertices d and f .

3.4 Ultrabubbles 

Ultrabubbles were introduced as a canonical generalization of superbubbles to bidirected graphs. Their similarities were exploited in Harviainen et al. (2026) in order to get a linear-time algorithm for finding ultrabubbles. This algorithm works by converting the input bidirected graph into a directed graph such that an ultrabubble in the original instance corresponds to a “weak” 7 superbubble    

> 7We do not need the exact definition of weak superbubble in this paper. The original definition can be found in (Gärtner and Stadler, 2019).

11 in the transformed instance, and vice-versa. As a corollary, they showed that ultrabubbles are “directable”, i.e., they can be cast on a directed graph. The approach of Harviainen et al. (2026) has the limitation of requiring the input graph to contain a tip or a cutvertex. Although ultrabubbles are originally defined in a way where their resemblance with superbubbles is not entirely clear, both these objects share the following key reachability property: every vertex in the superbubble/ultrabubble lies in some directed/bidirected path between the extremities of the bubble. In fact, many if not essentially all the structural results we present in detail for superbubbles can be adapted to ultrabubbles in a straightforward manner. As directed graphs are more common in the literature, we first present our SPQR tree approach to find superbubbles in linear time and then go on to show how to adapt this algorithm to find ultrabubbles also in linear time. To achieve this within our SPQR-tree-methodologies we must be able to perform the following two procedures in linear time: testing whether a bidirected graph has cycloids and finding its 

bidirected feedback edges , that is, edges whose deletion destroys all cycloids (i.e., the resulting bidirected graph is acyclic). We observe this to be impossible in general under the k-Clique Conjecture (see Conjecture 10 of Künnemann and Redzic (2024)), which asserts in particular that a triangle—a clique of 3 vertices—cannot be found in an undirected graph in time O(|V |ω−ϵ)

for the matrix multiplication exponent ω and any ϵ > 0. The result follows by a relatively simple reduction, where we essentially associate appropriate vertex-sides to each undirected edge of the graph such that any cycloid is an undirected triangle and vice versa; see Figure 6 for an example.      

> Figure 6: The reduction from finding triangles in tripartite graphs (left) to finding bidirected feedback edges, or finding cycloids, in bidirected graphs (right), where the vertices x,y, and zare omitted in the latter case. Roughly speaking, vertex-sides are associated to each undirected edge based on the tripartite sets of the endpoints of the edges such that triangles correspond to closed walks. If a triangle exists then there are no bidirected feedback edges because there are two disjoint closed walks (in violet).

Theorem 3. Let G be a bidirected graph. Under the k-Clique Conjecture , we cannot decide if a bidirected graph is acyclic (i.e. it has no cycloid) or it has at least one bidirected feedback edge, in time O(|V (G)|ω−ϵ) for any ϵ > 0.

Fortunately, we are able to exploit the special structure of ultrabubbles to solve these problems in linear time. We observe the problems to be linear-time solvable in graphs without tips, which is a property of ultrabubbles. Our solution involves an ear-addition procedure exploiting the bidi-rected reachability properties of the graph being constructed. If the construction succeeds then the procedure outputs a strongly connected directed graph with the same set of cycles as the original bidirected graph, and so we can use the linear-time algorithm of Garey and Tarjan (1978) to find 12 all feedback edges. If the procedure halts before having built the whole graph then we can correctly output that no feedback edge exists. 

Theorem 4. Let G be a bidirected graph without tips. Then the set of feedback edges of G can be computed in time O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|). Further, we can decide whether G has a cycloid in time 

O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|).

Theorem 5. The ultrabubbles of a bidirected graph G can be computed in time O(|V (G)|+|E(G)|).

# 4 Superbubbles 

In this section we develop a linear-time algorithm to find superbubbles in directed graphs. 

Basic notions Onodera et al. introduced in (Onodera et al., 2013) the notion of superbubble and motivate it as being a natural generalization of bubbles - a structurally simple graph motif appearing in graphs built from biological data. A superbubble (s, t ) is a minimal acyclic vertex-induced subgraph by the set of vertices reachable from s without going through t, which must coincide with the set of vertices that reach t without going through s. This property is called the 

matching property of superbubbles, so in particular every vertex in the superbubble lies in some 

s-t path (see (Onodera et al., 2013) for the formal definition). In the same paper Onodera et al. showed that every vertex is the entry (and exit) of at most one superbubble. A useful relaxation of superbubbles is that of superbubbloids, introduced by Gärtner et al. (2018); Gärtner and Stadler (2019); superbubbloids are superbubbles without the minimality con-straint. Moreover, (Gärtner et al., 2018; Gärtner and Stadler, 2019) defines (and proves equivalence with) these constructs in a way that is more suitable for our SPQR tree approach, as it exposes better the visual intuition that superbubbles are attached to the rest of the graph only by its defining vertices. 

Definition 1 (Superbubbloid (Gärtner and Stadler, 2019)) . Let G be a directed graph, X ⊆ V (G),and s, t ∈ X. The pair (s, t ) is a superbubbloid with superbubbloid graph G[X] if: 1. every u ∈ X is reachable from s,2. t is reachable from every u ∈ X,3. if u ∈ X and w ∈ V (G) \ X, then every w-u directed path contains s,4. if u ∈ X and w ∈ V (G) \ X, then every u-w directed path contains t,5. if uv is an edge in G[X], then every v-u directed path in G contains both t and s, and 6. G does not contain the edge ts .

Let (s, t ) be a superbubbloid with graph B. Vertex s is the entry and vertex t is the exit of the superbubbloid. The interior of (s, t ) is the set V (B) \ { s, t }; notice that the interior of a super-bubbloid does not contain sources or sinks. Since the pair (s, t ) uniquely defines the superbubbloid graph B and the superbubbloid graph B uniquely defines the pair (s, t ), we refer to both the graph and the pair of vertices simply as “superbubbloid”. A superbubble (s, t ) is a superbubbloid where no s′ ∈ V (B) \ { s} is such that (s′, t ) is a super-bubbloid. An edge st with N + 

> G

(s) = {t}, N − 

> G

(t) = {s}, and ts / ∈ E(G) is a trivial superbubble (in fact, the original notion of “bubbles” essentially coincides with that of trivial superbubbles). Next we give some results on the relation between cutvertices, superbubbloids, and superbub-bles. Importantly, we show that cutvertices are not in the interior of any superbubble. 

Lemma 4. Let G be a directed graph and let (s, t ) be a superbubbloid of G with graph B. Then 

(s, t ) is a superbubble if and only if no vertex in the interior of B is an s-t cutvertex in B.

13 Proof. The statement holds if B is trivial, so suppose B has at least three vertices. 

(⇒) (Trivial.) 

(⇐) Suppose for a contradiction that B has a vertex v̸ = s, t violating the minimality of (s, t ).Notice that B has an s-t directed path avoiding v for otherwise v is an s-t cutvertex. So s reaches 

t without v and so s is contained in the superbubbloid graph of (v, t ), and consequently v reaches 

s without t. But s reaches v without t because (s, t ) is a superbubbloid, and thus B has a cycle, a contradiction. 

Corollary 1. Superbubbles are biconnected. Proof. Suppose there is a vertex v in a superbubble (s, t ) with graph B such that B − v is dis-connected with components C′

> 1

, . . . , C ′ 

> ℓ

(ℓ ≥ 2) . Let Ci := B[V (C′

> i

) + v] for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ }.Observe that there is exactly one component Ci where both s and t appear, since if v̸ = s, t then v

does not separate s and t because Lemma 4 gives us two internally vertex-disjoint s-t paths in B

(and if v = s or v = t this follows trivially). Moreover, any component Cj but the one containing 

s and t contains at most one source or sink, which is v, since B has no sources or sinks besides s

and t due to conditions 1 and 2 of superbubbles (see Definition 1). Therefore Cj ⊆ B has a cycle, a contradiction to the acyclicity of superbubbles. 

Lemma 5 (Superbubbles and cutvertices) . Let G be a directed graph and let (s, t ) be a superbubble of G with graph B. Then no vertex in the interior of B is a cutvertex of G.Proof. We can assume that B contains at least three vertices. Suppose for a contradiction that the interior of B contains a cutvertex of G. There are two cases to analyze. 

No block contains both s and t: Since no block contains both s and t there is a vertex v

whose removal disconnects s from t in G. Since (s, t ) is a superbubble and every s-t path in U (G)

contains v, every s-t directed path in G also contains v. Thus v is reachable from s without t and so v ∈ V (B). Since B ⊆ G, vertex v is an s-t cutvertex in B, which is a contradiction by Lemma 4. 

There is a block containing s and t: Let v be a cutvertex of G in the interior of B. Removing 

v from G results in a disconnected graph where at least one component does not contain both s

and t since one block of G contains both s and t. Thus, let w be a vertex in such a component adjacent to v in G. Notice that regardless of whether vw ∈ E(G) or wv ∈ E(G), we have w ∈ V (B)

because v ∈ V (B). So, in G, w is reachable from s without t and reaches t without s, but any two directed paths witnessing these reachabilities contain v, and so there is a cycle in B through v, a contradiction. By Lemma 5 a cutvertex of G can only be the entry or the exit of a superbubble. Therefore, superbubble graphs are confined to the blocks of G, and moreover there is a unique block that contains both the entrance and exit of of any given superbubble. Then the task of computing superbubbles in a directed graph G reduces to that of computing superbubbles in each block of G.Since block-cut trees can be built in linear time, if we can find superbubbles inside a block in linear time then we can find every superbubble of an arbitrary graph also in linear time. The next result explains why (interesting) superbubbles induce 2-separators of the underlying undirected graph. 

Theorem 6 (Superbubbles and split pairs) . Let G be a directed graph and let (s, t ) be a superbubble of G with graph B. Let H1, . . . , H ℓ be the blocks of G (ℓ ≥ 1) . Then {s, t } is a split pair of some 

Hi or V (B) = V (Hi).

14 Proof. It follows from Lemma 5 that V (B) is contained in a block of G, say, without loss of generality, of H1. Suppose that |V (B)| ≥ 3, V (B)̸ = V (H1). Then it suffices to show that {s, t }

disconnects H1. Let u ∈ V (B) \ { s, t } and let v ∈ V (H1) \ V (B). By (3) and (4) of Definition 1, every u-v path in G contains t and every v-u path in G contains s. But then every u-v path in H1

contains s or t, and therefore {s, t } is a separation pair of H1.The interesting case of Theorem 6 is when the vertices identifying a superbubble form a separa-tion pair of a block, as the other two cases can be dealt with a linear-time preprocessing step (with a single graph traversal it is possible to decide if the whole block is a superbubble, and with a simple predicate it is possible to decide whether an edge is a trivial superbubble). By Lemma 1 we know that every separation pair of a graph is encoded as the endpoints of a virtual edge of some node of the SPQR tree, or as nonadjacent vertices in an S-node (but these cannot form superbubbles unless its superbubble graph is the whole block, as the next result shows; see Figure 7). Conversely, the endpoints of any virtual edge in a node of the SPQR tree forms a separation pair. Therefore, by correct examination of the virtual edges of the SPQR tree we can obtain the complete set of superbubbles of G (see Figure 3 for an example). 

Proposition 1. Let G be a directed graph, H a maximal 2-connected subgraph of G, T the SPQR tree of H, and μ ∈ V (T ) an S-node with u, v ∈ V (skeleton( μ)) . If {u, v } /∈ E(skeleton( μ)) then 

(u, v ) and (v, u ) are not superbubbles, unless the corresponding graph is H.Proof. Suppose for a contradiction and without loss of generality that (u, v ) is a superbubble with graph B. Assume B̸ = H. Let e1, . . . , e ℓ and f1, . . . , f k denote the sequence of edges in skeleton( μ)

in the two u-v paths of this S-node ( ℓ, k ≥ 2 because {u, v } /∈ E(skeleton( μ)) ). Since superbubbles are contained in blocks and u, v ∈ V (H) we have B ⊆ H and, due to the structure of the S-nodes, it is not hard to see that any u-v directed path contains the vertices which are endpoints of the edges 

ei or of the edges fj , for i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ } and j ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. Thus the set of vertices of B contains at least the endpoints of the edges ei or those of fj (possibly of both). Suppose without loss of generality that B contains those of the edges ei. We claim that V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) ⊆ V (B).Suppose otherwise and let w ∈ V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) \ V (B) and let ei = {x, y } be the edge such that w ∈ V (expansion( ei)) , and suppose that x denotes the vertex closest to u in skeleton( μ)

(possibly y = v). By Lemma 3 expansion( ei) has an x-w path p avoiding y, which starts in a vertex in B and ends in a vertex not in B. Let x′ denote the last vertex in p that is in B (possibly x′ = x). So x′ has a successor y′ in p which is not contained in B (notice that y′̸ = v since p avoids y). Thus expansion( ei) has a directed edge x′y′ or y′x′. Since x′ ∈ V (B), B has a u-x′ path avoiding 

v and an x′-t path avoiding u. Therefore, if x′y′ ∈ E(expansion( ei)) then expansion( ei) has a 

u-y′ path avoiding v, thus y′ ∈ V (B), a contradiction, and similarly a contradiction is obtained if 

y′x′ ∈ E(expansion( ei)) . Hence V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) ⊆ V (B).If B has a vertex not in V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) then such a vertex can be chosen so that it is an endpoint of an edge fj . Thus the same argument as above can be made to conclude that V (⋃ki=1 expansion( fi)) ⊆ V (B). But notice that either V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) ⊆ V (B) or 

V (⋃ki=1 expansion( fi)) ⊆ V (B) hold, for if both hold then V (H) ⊆ V (B) and since superbub-bles are contained in blocks we get V (B) = V (H) and hence B = H, a contradiction. So 

V (B) ⊆ V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) without loss of generality and thus V (B) = V (⋃ℓi=1 expansion( ei)) .Due to the structure of S-nodes and the fact that ℓ ≥ 2 we can conclude that B has a u-v cutvertex, a contradiction to Lemma 4. The next result is merely technical and will be used later on to show correctness of the super-bubble finding algorithm. 15 Figure 7: Why nonadjacent vertices in an S-node do not form superbubbles (Proposition 1). (a) S-node skeleton of a block H with u and v nonadjacent. There are two u-v paths in the cycle. (b) The superbubble graph B must contain one entire side. (c) Since this side has at least two edges, there is a u-v cutvertex in B (red), a contradiction. If both sides lie in B then B = H, a contradiction. 

Lemma 6 (Unique orientation at poles of acyclic components) . Let G be a directed graph and let 

C ⊆ V (G), |C| ≥ 2, be such that G[C] is connected and G[C] is acyclic. Moreover, let s, t ∈ C be such that for all other vertices v ∈ C \{ s, t } there is no edge in G between v and some v′ ∈ V (G)\C.If no vertex in C \ { s, t } is a source or sink of G, then one vertex among {s, t } is the unique source of G[C] and the other vertex is the unique sink of G[C].Proof. Notice that since G[C] is acyclic, it has at least one source (relative to G[C]), say v. If 

v ∈ C \ { s, t }, then it is also a source of G, since by the hypothesis there is no edge in G between 

v and some v′ ∈ V (G) \ C. This contradicts the assumption that no vertex in C \ { s, t } is a source of G. Therefore, any source of G[C] belongs to {s, t }.Symmetrically, we have that any sink of G[C] belongs to {s, t }. Observe that neither s nor t

can be both a source and a sink of G[C], because otherwise it would be an isolated vertex with no edges in G[C], which contradicts the assumption that G[C] is connected. Therefore, since G[C]

has at least one source and at least one sink (being acyclic), one vertex among {s, t } is the unique source of G[C] and the other vertex is the unique sink in G[C].

4.1 Setup 

Here, we focus on superbubbles that induce a separation pair of a block H. The next result will be applied frequently later on. 

Lemma 7. Let G be a directed graph, let {s, t } be a separation pair of a maximal 2-connected subgraph of G, and let K be the union of a nonempty subset of the split components of {s, t }. If there are no extremities of G in V (K) \ { s, t }, K is acyclic, N + 

> G

(s) ⊆ V (K), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (K), and 

ts / ∈ E(G), then (s, t ) is a superbubbloid of G with graph K.Proof. Let K1, . . . , K k denote the set of split components of {s, t } whose union is K (k ≥ 1) . We show that K fulfills each condition of Definition 1. 1. Let u ∈ V (Ki) and let p = v1, . . . , v ℓ be a maximal directed path in Ki containing u (ℓ ≥ 1) .Suppose that v1 has in-neighbors in Ki. If v1 has an in-neighbor in p then this edge is in Ki by maximality of split component, and so there is a cycle in Ki ⊆ K, a contradiction. If v1 has an in-neighbor in Ki that is not in p then p can be prolonged, contradicting its maximality. 16 Therefore v1 does not have in-neighbors in Ki and thus v1 = s since s is the unique source of 

Ki. Analogously, we have vℓ = t. As ⋃ki=1 V (Ki) = V (K) it follows that every vertex in K

lies in some s-t directed path, and thus it is reachable from s and reaches t.2. (Proved in the previous item.) 3. Let u ∈ V (K) and w ∈ V (G) \ V (K). If u = s we are done. Otherwise, suppose for a contradiction that G has a w-u directed path avoiding s. Then, since K consists of the union of split components of {s, t }, this path contains t, a contradiction to the fact that every in-neighbor of t is contained in K. Therefore every w-u path in G contains s.4. (Analogous to the previous item.) 5. Let uv ∈ E(K) and let Ki denote the split component that contains the edge uv . Suppose for a contradiction that G has a v-u path avoiding, say, s. Then this path is contained in 

Ki because Ki is a split component (if the path leaves Ki it must do it through t, but then it cannot reenter since paths do not repeat vertices). This path together with the edge uv 

forms a cycle in Ki, a contradiction. Therefore every v-u path in G contains both t and s.6. Direct by assumption. We assume in what follows that the SPQR tree of H does not consist of a single node, since otherwise any superbubble is either H or a single edge by Theorem 6 and Proposition 1. Let T be the SPQR tree of H. Let {ν, μ } ∈ E(T ) such that ν is the parent of μ, and let 

eν be the virtual edge in skeleton( μ) pertaining to ν and define eμ analogously; let {s, t } denote the endpoints of these virtual edges. In the edge {ν, μ } we store two pieces of information: the state corresponding to the subgraph expansion( eμ) as State ν,μ [·] and the state corresponding to 

expansion( eν ) as State μ,ν [·]. We say that State ν,μ [·] leaves ν and that it enters μ. (This can be seen as a directed edge in the tree pointing from ν to μ.) Let X = expansion( eμ). Notice that any state uniquely identifies a virtual edge, in this case eμ. In State ν,μ we store the following information: 

• State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] := True iff no vertex in V (X) \ { s, t } is an extremity of G.

• State ν,μ [Acyclic ] := 

> 

Null , if State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is false, 

True , otherwise, if X is acyclic, 

False , otherwise. 

• State ν,μ [Reaches st ] := 

> 

Null , if State ν,μ [Acyclic ] is False or Null ,

True , otherwise, if s reaches t in X,

False , otherwise. 

• State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] := 

> 

Null , if State ν,μ [Acyclic ] is False or Null ,

True , otherwise, if t reaches s in X,

False , otherwise. We define State μ,ν [·] in the same way, but where X is the graph expansion( eν ) (i.e., this state now “points” from μ to ν). With this information we can “almost” decide if a separation pair 

{s, t } identifies a superbubble (s, t ), since if State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] and State ν,μ [Acyclic ] are True ,

N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (expansion( eμ)) , and ts /∈ E(G), then (s, t ) is a superbubbloid with graph 

expansion( eμ) by Lemma 7. This fact also hints that most of our effort is in the computation of 

State ν,μ [·] for all edges {ν, μ } of T , as the other conditions are easy to check. The algorithm consists of three phases. 17 • Phase 1. Process the edges {ν, μ } of T (with ν the parent of μ) with a DFS traversal starting in the root, and compute all State ν,μ [·].

• Phase 2. Process the nodes ν of T with a BFS traversal starting in the root. For every child 

μ of ν, compute all State μ,ν [·].

• Phase 3. Examine the separation pairs {s, t } of H in T and use the information computed in the previous phases to decide whether (s, t ) or (t, s ) are superbubbles. 

4.2 Algorithm - Phase 1 

Phase 1 is a dynamic program over the edges of T . Let ν be the parent of μ in T and let {s, t }

denote the endpoints of eν ∈ skeleton( μ) and of eμ ∈ skeleton( ν). If μ has no children then the edges of its skeleton but eν are all real edges, and hence the problem of updating State ν,μ [·] is trivial: with one DFS on skeleton *(μ) − st − ts we can decide State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ], State ν,μ [Acyclic ],

State ν,μ [Reaches st ], and State ν,μ [Reaches ts ]. Otherwise μ has at least one virtual edge besides eν .Let us denote the children of μ by μ1, . . . , μ k (k ≥ 1) and denote the endpoints of the corresponding virtual edges ei in skeleton( μ) as {si, t i} for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. Assume recursively that State μ,μ i [·]

is solved and let X = expansion( eμ), Xi = expansion( ei) for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }, and let K =skeleton *(μ) − st − ts .We now describe how to compute the states State ν,μ [·].

State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ]: We set State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] to True if and only if no vertex in V (K) \ { s, t }

is an extremity and State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] is True for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. To see this is correct we prove both implications. (⇒) Suppose no vertex in V (X)\{ s, t } is an extremity. Then indeed, no vertex in V (K)\{ s, t }

is an extremity because V (K) ⊆ V (X). Moreover, State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] must be True for all 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }, for otherwise an extremity x in Xi is different from both si and ti and thus also different from s and t, as it does not belong to skeleton( μ) since {si, t i} is a separation pair. 

(⇐) Suppose no vertex in V (K) \ { s, t } is an extremity and State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] is True for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. For a contradiction, assume that some x ∈ V (X)\{ s, t } is an extremity. By the initial assumption, we have that x cannot belong to V (K). Thus, x is also different from 

si, t i, for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. Since x ∈ V (X) \ { s, t }, x is a vertex of Xi for some i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }.Therefore, it is an extremity for it, since it is different from si and ti. This contradicts the initial assumption that State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] is True .

State ν,μ [Acyclic ]: If State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is False then we set State ν,μ [Acyclic ] to Null , which is correct by definition. Thus, in the following we assume that State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is True .If for some i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } State μ,μ i [Acyclic ] is Null , then by definition State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] is 

False . Let thus x be an extremity in V (Xi) \ { si, t i}. Since {si, t i} is a separation pair, we have that x / ∈ { s, t }. Thus, x ∈ V (X) \ { s, t }, which contradicts the fact State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ]

is True . Thus State μ,μ i [Acyclic ] is True or False for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }.If for some i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } State μ,μ i [Acyclic ] is False , then Xi has a cycle, which implies that also X contains a cycle because Xi is a subgraph of X. Since State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is True ,then by definition we can set State ν,μ [Acyclic ] to False .Finally, we are in the case where for every i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }, State μ,μ i [Acyclic ] is True , and therefore State μ,μ i [Reaches st ] and State μ,μ i [Reaches ts ] are True or False . In other words, each 18 Xi is acyclic, and, importantly, the reachability in Xi between the endpoints of each virtual edge ei are known. Then K can be built explicitly and we can set State ν,μ [Acyclic ] to True if K is acyclic and to 

False otherwise. To see this is correct, notice that any cycle C in X can be mapped to a cycle in K: whenever C uses edges of some Xi, it passes through si (or ti), and since Xi is acyclic, it must return to ti (or si). This path of C in Xi between si and ti (or between ti and si)can be mapped to the edge of K that was introduced from si to ti, if State μ,μ i [Reaches st ] is 

True (or from ti to si, if State μ,μ i [Reaches ts ] is True ). Viceversa, every cycle C in K can be symmetrically mapped to a cycle in X such that whenever C uses some edge siti (or tisi) in 

K, we expand this edge into a path from si to ti (or from ti to si) in Xi.

State ν,μ [Reaches st ], State ν,μ [Reaches ts ]: At this point we have State ν,μ [Acyclic ] computed. If it is 

False or Null we set State ν,μ [Reaches st ] and State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] to Null , which is correct by definition. Otherwise X is acyclic, V (X) \ { s, t } has no cutvertex, no sink and no source of 

G, and there is no edge between a vertex not in V (X) and a vertex in V (X) \ { s, t } since 

{s, t } is a separation pair; moreover X is clearly connected. We can thus apply Lemma 6 to conclude that one vertex between s and t is a source of X and the other is a sink. In the former case we can set State ν,μ [Reaches st ] to True and State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] to False , and in the latter case we can set State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] to True and State ν,μ [Reaches st ] to False .Let μ be a node of T and let ν be its parent. Since T is a tree, each of its edges is processed exactly once during the DFS, thus every state of the form State ν,μ [·] is updated during this phase. Moreover, since every node μ has a unique parent in T and skeleton *(μ) is built only when the edge {ν, μ } is processed, each directed skeleton skeleton *(μ) is built only once during the algorithm. Since the computational work per edge {ν, μ } is linear in the size of skeleton *(μ) and the total size of all skeletons is linear in the size of the current block H (recall Lemma 2), Phase 1 runs in time 

O(|V (H)| + |E(H)|).

4.3 Algorithm - Phase 2 

In Phase 2 we compute the states State μ,ν [·] with ν the parent of μ by processing the nodes of T

via Breadth-First Search, i.e., we compute the states “pointing” towards the root. Notice that the dependencies between states behave differently from Phase 1. Now the relevant states for State μ,ν [·]

are those leaving ν to its children except μ, and the state leaving ν to its parent whenever ν is different from the root of T ; the former states are known from Phase 1 and the latter state is known due to the breadth-first traversal order. We remark that following the same strategy of computation as in Phase 1 may cause the algorithm to have a worst-case quadratic running time. For example, if T consists only of node ρ with children μ1, . . . , μ k, then in order to update State μi,ν [Acyclic ] we would have to build skeleton *(ν) − siti − tisi for each i = 1 , . . . , k , which would have a quadratic running time in the size of the graph whenever, e.g., |V (skeleton( ν)) | ≥ | V (G)|/2. To overcome this issue we examine the states State μi,ν [Acyclic ] for i = 1 , . . . , k all “at once”. Let ν be a node of T . Let μ1, . . . , μ k denote the children of ν and denote the endpoints of the corresponding virtual edges in skeleton( ν) as ei = {si, t i} for i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } (k ≥ 1) . To distinguish the reference edges eν belonging to each node μi, we write eiν for the edge eν in node μi. Assume from the breadth-first traversal order that the states leaving ν to its parent are known and, for convenience, denote by e0 = {s0, t 0} the reference edge of ν and by μ0 the parent of ν, so the neighbours of ν in T are the nodes μ0, μ 1 . . . , μ k (if ν is the root of T then μ0 and e0 can be ignored during the following discussion). Let Xi = expansion( eiν ), K = skeleton *(ν), and Ki = K−siti −tisi

for every i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }.19 First we compute State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ] for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } similarly to Phase 1. 

State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ]: We set State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ] to True if and only if no vertex in V (Ki)\{ si, t i}

is an extremity and State ν,μ j [NoInnerExtr ] is True for every j ∈ { 0, . . . , k } \ { i}. To see this is correct we prove both implications. (⇒) Suppose no vertex in V (Xi) \ { si, t i} is an extremity. Then indeed, no vertex in V (Ki) \{si, t i} is an extremity. Moreover, State ν,μ j [NoInnerExtr ] must be True for each j ∈ { 0, . . . , k }

distinct from i, for otherwise an extremity in expansion( ej ) is different from both sj and tj

and thus also different from si and ti, as it does not belong to skeleton( ν) since {sj , t j } is a separation pair. 

(⇐) Suppose no vertex in V (Ki) \ { si, t i} is an extremity and that State ν,μ j [NoInnerExtr ] is 

True for all j ∈ { 0, . . . , k } \ { i}. For a contradiction, assume that a vertex x ∈ V (Xi) \ { si, t i}

is an extremity. By the initial assumption, we have that x cannot belong to V (Ki). Thus, x is also different from sj , t j for each j ∈ { 0, . . . , k }\{ i}, and so x is an extremity in expansion( ej )

for some j ∈ { 0, . . . , k } \ { i}. Therefore it is an extremity for it, since it is different from sj

and tj , contradicting the assumption that State ν,μ j [NoInnerExtr ] is True .Then we compute the states State μi,ν [Acyclic ] for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. Notice that at this point the states State ν,μ i [Reaches st ] and State ν,μ i [Reaches ts ] are known for all i ∈ { 0, . . . , k }. We proceed by cases on the values of these states. 

• If there is an i ∈ { 0, . . . , k } such that State ν,μ i [Reaches st ] or State ν,μ i [Reaches ts ] is Null , then by definition State ν,μ i [Acyclic ] is Null or False . Then we proceed by cases. 

– If State ν,μ i [Acyclic ] is Null then State ν,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] is False by definition, and so there is an extremity x ∈ V (expansion( ei)) \ { si, t i}. So for every j ∈ { 1, . . . , k } distinct from 

i, vertex x is an extremity also for Xj : x ∈ V (Xj ) because expansion( ei) is a subgraph of 

Xj and x is different from sj , t j since x is different from si, t i and {si, t i} is a separation pair; thus each state State μj,ν [Acyclic ] is Null .For the remaining state State μi,ν [Acyclic ] we proceed by cases. First, if State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ]

is False then State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is Null . We can thus assume that State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ] is 

True , which implies that State ν,μ j [Acyclic ] is True or False for each j ∈ { 0, . . . , k } distinct from i. If some State ν,μ j [Acyclic ] is False then expansion( ej ) has a cycle, and hence so does Xi as it is a supergraph of expansion( ej ); therefore State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is False . Oth-erwise every State ν,μ j [Acyclic ] is True and thus we are in conditions to build Ki since the states State ν,μ j [Reaches st ] and State ν,μ j [Reaches ts ] are not Null by definition. Then 

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is False if and only if Ki has a cycle because any cycle in Xi can be mapped to a cycle in Ki (similarly to the acyclicity update rule discussed in Phase 1). 

– Otherwise State ν,μ i [Acyclic ] is False . So expansion( ei) contains a cycle C. Then for every 

j ∈ { 1, . . . , k } with j̸ = i, State μj,ν [Acyclic ] is False since C ⊆ expansion( ei) ⊆ Xj . For the remaining state State μi,ν [Acyclic ] we proceed identically as in the case above. 

• Otherwise State ν,μ i [Reaches st ] and State ν,μ i [Reaches ts ] are either True or False for all i ∈{0, . . . , k }. Therefore we are in conditions to build K. Moreover, the fact that the reachability states are all either True or False implies, by definition, that State ν,μ i [Acyclic ] is True for all 

i ∈ { 0, . . . , k }; in particular, there is no cycle in K of the form sitisi. So State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is 

True if and only if Ki is acyclic (the correctness of this argument was established in Phase 1), 20 and hence it is enough to examine the acyclicity of Ki in order to determine State μi,ν [Acyclic ],for every i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. However, we do not test the acyclicity of each Ki individually. First, notice that if K is acyclic then so is Ki because Ki is a subgraph of K, in which case 

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is True for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. Otherwise K has a cycle. Let i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }. Suppose that an edge ei ∈ E(K) intersects every cycle of K. Since 

Ki = K − ei it follows that Ki is acyclic, and therefore State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is True . Conversely, if ei does not intersect every cycle of K then Ki has a cycle, and therefore State μi,ν [Acyclic ]

is False .So in order to keep the algorithm linear-time, it suffices to identify the edges that intersect every cycle of the directed skeleton in time proportional to its size. This is essentially the feedback arc set problem for the restricted case where every feedback set contains just one arc 8 (“arc” and “edge” mean the same thing). Our subroutine to find feedback-arcs works as follows. We start by testing if the graph is acyclic. If it is we are done. Otherwise we compute the strongly connected components (SCCs) of G. If there are multiple non-trivial SCCs then there are two disjoint cycles and no solution exists. Thus, the last case is when there is a single non-trivial SCC, where we then have to find feedback-arcs. For that, we use the linear-time algorithm of Garey and Tarjan (Garey and Tarjan, 1978) for finding feedback vertices, and use a standard linear-time reduction from the feedback problem on arcs to the feedback problem on vertices described in, e.g., Even et al. (Even et al., 1998)). We briefly describe how the reduction works. Subdivide each arc uv of G into two arcs uw and wv ,thus obtaining a graph G′ with |V (G)| + |E(G)| vertices and 2|E(G)| edges. If an arc uv is a feedback arc of G then w is a feedback vertex of G′ (deleting w from G′ corresponds to deleting the arcs uw and wv in G), and the converse also holds. Notice, however, that G′ has feedback vertices that do not correspond to arcs of G, but those can be safely ignored. The states State μi,μ [Reaches st ], State μi,μ [Reaches ts ] get updated for i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } as in Phase 1. 

State μi,ν [Reaches st ], State μi,ν [Reaches ts ]: At this point State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is known. If State μi,ν [Acyclic ]

is False or Null then State μi,ν [Reaches st ] and State μi,ν [Reaches ts ] are Null by definition. Other-wise State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is True , and thus so is State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ] by definition. Therefore, Xi

is acyclic, V (Xi) \ { si, t i} has no cutvertex, no sink and no source of G, and there is no edge between a vertex not in V (Xi) and a vertex in V (Xi) \ { si, t i} since {si, t i} is a separation pair; moreover Xi is clearly connected. We can thus apply Lemma 6 to conclude that one vertex between si and ti is a source of Xi and the other is a sink. In the former case we can set State μi,ν [Reaches st ] to True and State μi,ν [Reaches ts ] to False , and in the latter case we can set State μi,ν [Reaches ts ] to True and State μi,ν [Reaches st ] to False .Notice that each node ν of T is processed exactly once during this phase by BFS properties. Moreover, this also implies that every state pointing from a node to its parent gets updated, as desired. As the work done in ν is linear in the size of skeleton *(ν) (see Algorithm 2), with Lemma 2 we can conclude that Phase 2 runs in time O(|V (H)| + |E(H)|).

Lemma 8. Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 correctly compute the states State ν,μ [·] and State μ,ν [·] for every edge {ν, μ } of T and run in time O(|V (H)| + |E(H)|) where H is the input graph.      

> 8In its generality, the feedback arc set problem is an NP-hard problem which asks if a directed graph Ghas a subset of at most kedges intersecting every cycle of G. Here, we are interested in enumerating all feedback-arcs.

21 4.4 Algorithm - Phase 3 

In Phase 3 the pairs (s, t ), (t, s ) such that {s, t } is a separation pair of H are reported. (Recall that these are necessarily endpoints of virtual edges due to Lemma 1 and Proposition 1). Further, if a pair of vertices are adjacent in the skeleton of an S-node and these identify a superbubble then the corresponding superbubble graph is not within the S-node, as we show next. 

Proposition 2 (Superbubbles and S-nodes) . Let G be a directed graph, let (s, t ) be a superbubble of 

G with graph B, let T be the SPQR tree of a maximal 2-connected subgraph of G, and let e = {s, t }

be a virtual edge of a node of T . If the pertaining node of e is an S-node then B̸ ⊆ expansion( e).Proof. Suppose for a contradiction that B ⊆ expansion( e). By definition of S-node, the graph 

expansion( e) is a split component of the split pair {s, t } and moreover contains a vertex y separating 

s from t, so y is an s-t cutvertex in B since B ⊆ expansion( e). The result now follows from Lemma 4. Thus, if (s, t ) is a superbubble and {s, t } is a separation pair of H, then there is a P-node of T

with vertex-set {s, t }, or there is an R-node of T with a virtual edge {s, t }. We discuss informally the two cases. SPQR trees encode not only every separation pair of the graph but also the respective sets of split components. The way in which these split components are put together to form the skeletons of the nodes is what defines the different types of nodes, S, P, and R, as well as the SPQR tree itself. For the application of finding superbubbles, examining only the natural separations (and split components thereof) encoded in the SPQR tree is not enough to ensure completeness. Consider, for instance, a P-node μ with k ≥ 4 split components. The separations encoded in each of the 

k tree-edges incident to μ implicitly group k − 1 expansions of the edges of skeleton( μ) and puts the vertices therein in one side of the separation, and the vertices on the expansion of remaining virtual edge is put on the remaining side of the separation. However, it may be that the graph of a superbubble could match, e.g., the union of the expansions of two virtual edges of skeleton( μ). To overcome this, we first iterate over all the P-nodes of T (say, with vertex set {s, t }) and group the virtual edges containing out-neighbours of s and group the virtual edges containing in-neighbours of 

t; these have to match, otherwise (s, t ) is not a superbubble. Further, for each virtual edge in these (matching) sets, we check if the respective state leaving this P-node has the acyclicity and absence-of-extremities fields set to true. Finally, if all the out-neighbors (resp. in-neighbors) of s (resp. t)are contained in candidate superbubble graph given by the matching sets, and ts / ∈ E(G), then 

(s, t ) is a superbubbloid by Lemma 7. Minimality follows from the structure of P-nodes as follows. If the resulting matching sets have more than one edge then minimality follows from Lemma 4. Otherwise, if the pertaining node of the unique edge in the set is an S-node then Proposition 2 tells us that the expansion of that edge is not a superbubble, and so in this case S-nodes can be ignored; hence the pertaining node in question is an R-node, in which case minimality follows easily due to the connectivity of R-nodes. We formalize this discussion with the next two results. 

Proposition 3 (Superbubbloids and P-nodes, see Figure 8) . Let G be a directed graph, H be a maximal 2-connected subgraph of G, and μ be a P-node of the SPQR tree of H. Let e1, . . . , e k

denote the edges of skeleton( μ)) with endpoints {s, t } (k ≥ 3) . Let E+ 

> s

= {ei : V (expansion( ei)) ∩

N +(s)̸ = ∅} , E− 

> t

= {ei : V (expansion( ei)) ∩ N −(t)̸ = ∅} , and K = ⋃ 

> e∈E+
> s

expansion( e). Then (s, t )

identifies a superbubbloid of G with graph K if and only if E+

> s

̸ = ∅, E+ 

> s

= E− 

> t

, N + 

> G

(s) ⊆ V (K),

N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (K), ts / ∈ E(G), and for each e ∈ E+ 

> s

the graph expansion( e) is acyclic and does not contain extremities of G except {s, t }.

22 Proof. (⇒) Let (s, t ) be a superbubbloid of G with graph B and let μ be a P-node whose skeleton has vertex set {s, t }. Since superbubbles are contained in the blocks of G by Lemma 5 and s, t ∈ V (H) it follows that V (B) ⊆ V (H). Further, since B contains all the out-neighbors of s and V (B) ⊆ V (H),it follows that E+

> s

̸ = ∅ (analogously, E−

> t

̸ = ∅). We show that K = B.We show that K ⊆ B. Notice that K is an induced subgraph since each expansion is induced and there are no edges across expansions. Since B is also induced by definition of superbubbloid, it is enough to show that any vertex in K is also in B. Notice that if u ∈ V (K) then u ∈ expansion( e)

for some e ∈ E+ 

> s

. As established in the proof of (1) of Lemma 7, expansion( e) has a directed path from s to t through u since it is acyclic and has no extremities except {s, t }, and since (s, t ) is a superbubbloid, we have u ∈ B. Now we show that B ⊆ K. Suppose for a contradiction that 

B̸ ⊆ K. Since K and B are induced subgraphs there is a vertex v ∈ V (B) \ V (K). So in particular, 

s reaches v without t via some directed path. Due to the structure of P-nodes, this path is contained in expansion( e) for some e ∈ E(skeleton( μ)) . Thus, the first vertex following s in this path is also in expansion( e) and hence expansion( e) has an out-neighbour of s. Therefore e ∈ E+ 

> s

and hence 

v ∈ V (K), a contradiction. The conditions N + 

> G

(s) ⊆ V (K) and N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (K) follow trivially since B = K, and ts / ∈ E(G)

because (s, t ) is a superbubbloid. Further, for each e ∈ E+ 

> s

the graph expansion( e) is acyclic and does not contain extremities of G except {s, t }, since a cycle or extremity except {s, t } in some expansion would be a cycle or extremity in K, each contradicting the fact that K is a superbubbloid graph. The equality E+ 

> s

= E− 

> t

follows at once from the fact that B = K = ⋃ 

> e∈E+
> s

expansion( e)

and N + 

> G

(s) ⊆ V (K) and N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (K).

(⇐) First, notice that if {s, t } is not a separation pair then skeleton( μ) has exactly three edges, two of which are the real edges st and ts (recall that G has no parallel edges and that 

|E(skeleton( μ)) | ≥ 3 by definition), a contradiction to the assumption that ts / ∈ E(G).So {s, t } is a separation pair and K consists of a union of a nonempty subset of split components of {s, t } since E+

> s

̸ = ∅. Moreover, K has no extremities of G except {s, t } because expansion( e)

has no extremities of G except {s, t } for every e ∈ E+ 

> s

. Further, since expansion( e) is acyclic and has no sources or sinks except {s, t } for all e ∈ E+ 

> s

, it follows that one vertex in {s, t } is the unique source and the other is the unique sink of expansion( e) (see Lemma 6); due to the neighborhood constraints, it follows that s is the source and t is the sink of expansion( e). Also, since expansion( e)

is acyclic for each e ∈ E+ 

> s

, any cycle in K contains vertices from different split components. So a cycle in K contains both s and t, but since s is a source (and t is a sink) in expansion( e) for any 

e ∈ E+ 

> s

, it follows that K is acyclic. So we are in conditions of applying Lemma 7 and conclude that (s, t ) is a superbubbloid of G with graph K.

Proposition 4 (Superbubbles and R-nodes) . Let G be a directed graph, H be a maximal 2-connected subgraph of G, and ν, μ be nodes of the SPQR tree of H. Let eμ = {s, t } ∈ E(skeleton( ν)) 

be the virtual edge pertaining to μ and eν ∈ E(skeleton( μ)) be the virtual edge pertaining to ν. If ν

is an R-node, N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (expansion( eν )) , expansion( eν ) is acyclic and has no extremities except {s, t }, ts / ∈ E(G), then (s, t ) is a superbubble with graph expansion( eν ).Proof. Let K = expansion( eν ). Notice that {s, t } is a separation pair of H and that K is a split component with respect to {s, t }. So we are in conditions of applying Lemma 7, which implies that 

(s, t ) is a superbubbloid with graph K. Next we argue on the minimality. Notice that skeleton( ν) has three internally vertex-disjoint s-t paths since it is 3-connected. Then skeleton( ν) without the edge {s, t } has two internally vertex-disjoint s-t undirected paths and hence so does K (split components are connected, so a path through the edges of skeleton( ν)

can be mapped to a path in K). Therefore (s, t ) is a superbubble by Lemma 4. 23 Figure 8: Superbubbloids in a P-node (Proposition 3). (a) P-node skeleton with four parallel split components between s and t. The green edges are those whose expansion contains out-neighbors of s and in-neighbors of t               

> (E+
> s=E−
> t). (b) The three green paths go from sto tand their union Kforms the superbubbloid graph. The gray path goes from tto sand is not part of K.

4.5 The superbubble finding algorithm 

We are in conditions to prove the correctness of the superbubble finding algorithm directly. 

Correctness and runtime Theorem 7. Let G be a directed graph. The algorithm computing superbubbles (Algorithm 4) is correct, that is, it finds every superbubble of G and only its superbubbles, and it can be implemented in time O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|).Proof. (Completeness.) We argue that every superbubble (s, t ) of G is reported by the algorithm. Let B denote the superbubble graph of (s, t ) and H the block containing B.If (s, t ) is a trivial superbubble then N + 

> G

(s) = {t}, N − 

> G

(t) = {s}, and ts / ∈ E(G) by definition. These are exactly the conditions tested in Line 5 and 7, and so (s, t ) is reported by the algorithm. Otherwise, if V (B) = V (H), then (s, t ) is reported by the algorithm in Line 13: clearly, B has at most one source s and at most one sink t of G, no vertex in the interior of B is a cutvertex of G

by Lemma 5, B is acyclic, ts / ∈ E(G), and the out-neighbors of s and the in-neighbors of t are all contained in H. These conditions altogether are enough to report the pair (s, t ).Otherwise {s, t } is a separation pair of H by Theorem 6 (so H is a maximal 2-connected subgraph of G). Let T denote the SPQR tree of H. Since no pair of nonadjacent vertices in an S-node identifies a superbubble by Proposition 1, it follows by Lemma 1 that {s, t } are endpoints of a virtual edge of a node μ of T . This virtual edge is associated with a tree edge {ν, μ }. Let eμ

be the virtual edge in ν pertaining to μ and let eν the virtual edge in μ pertaining to ν.If μ is an S-node then Proposition 2 implies that B̸ ⊆ expansion( eμ). (Essentially State ν,μ [·]

can be ignored). Symmetrically, State μ,ν [·] can be ignored whenever ν is an S-node. If μ is a P-node with vertex set {s, t } then B can be expressed as the union of the expansions of the virtual edges of μ as described in Proposition 3. Symmetrically, the same is done whenever ν is a P-node. Hence, the remaining virtual edges that encode superbubbles are those contained in the R-nodes. Moreover, if the pertaining node of such a virtual edge is a P-node then (s, t ) is processed when analyzing P-nodes. So it suffices to analyze P-nodes individually followed by the tree-edges {ν, μ }

such that ν is not a P-node and μ is an R-node. We argue on the two cases separately. 24 • μ is a P-node: Let e1, . . . , e k be the edges in skeleton( μ) whose endpoints are {s, t } (k ≥ 3) .Since (s, t ) is a superbubble, (s, t ) is also a superbubbloid and thus Proposition 3 implies that B can be expressed, without loss of generality, as ⋃k′ 

> i=1

expansion( ei) for some k′ < k 

(k̸ = k′ since otherwise V (B) = V (H)); further, it implies that expansion( ei) is acyclic and has no extremities except {s, t } for each i = 1 , . . . , k ′, E+ 

> s

= E− 

> t

, N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (B) and 

ts / ∈ E(G). If k′̸ = 1 then these conditions are enough to report (s, t ) as a superbubble (Line 15 or Line 21). Otherwise we have k′ = 1 . If e1 is a real edge then it was reported when analyzing the trivial superbubbles (notice also that, in this case, the conditions given by Proposition 3 match those characterizing a trivial superbubble). Otherwise e1 is virtual and thus it has a pertaining node in T . Suppose for a contradiction that the pertaining node of e1 is an S-node. Since (s, t ) is a superbubble and the out-neighbors of s are all contained in expansion( e1), it implies that B ⊆ expansion( e1), from where Proposition 2 gives a contradiction. Therefore the pertaining node of e1 is not an S-node and (s, t ) is reported in Line 13 or Line 19. 

• μ is an R-node and ν is not a P-node: We have that s and t are the endpoints of eμ

and eν . Suppose that s has out-neighbors both in expansion( eν ) and expansion( eμ). Then we claim that V (H) = V (B), a contradiction to the fact that we are under the assumption 

V (H)̸ = V (B). First we show that V (expansion( eν )) ⊆ V (B).Suppose for a contradiction that V (expansion( eν )) ̸ ⊆ V (B). Let x ∈ V (expansion( eν )) \V (B).We claim that U (expansion( eν )) has an s-x path p avoiding t. Let ex = {x′, y ′} be an edge in skeleton( ν) − eμ whose expansion contains x with x′̸ = t (possibly x′ = s or y′ = t, but not both equalities hold). First we argue that skeleton( ν) − eμ has an s-x′ path avoiding 

t and then we argue that expansion( ex) has an x′-x path avoiding t. The concatenation of these two paths produces an undirected s-x walk in U (expansion( eν )) avoiding t, which can be simplified into the desired path. If ν is an S-node then skeleton( ν) − eμ consists of a path between s and t with at least three vertices. Since x′̸ = t the graph skeleton( ν) − eμ has an s-x′ path avoiding t. If ν is an R-node then skeleton( ν) has three internally vertex-disjoint s-x′ paths at most one of which contains the edge eν . Thus skeleton( ν) − eμ has an s-x′ path avoiding t. Notice that this path can be mapped to a path in expansion( eν ) since split components are connected (while still avoiding 

t). Finally, applying Lemma 3 gives an x′-x undirected path in expansion( ex) avoiding y′, so this path does not contain t.The undirected path p starts in a vertex contained in B and ends in a vertex not contained in B. Let a denote the last vertex in p that is contained in B (such a vertex exists since 

a = s at the earliest). Then a has a successor in p, say b, which is not contained in B.Thus U (expansion( eν )) has an edge {a, b } and hence expansion( eν ) has an edge ab or ba .Since B is a superbubble graph and a ∈ V (B), H has an s-a directed path avoiding t and an a-t directed path avoiding s. So if ab ∈ E(expansion( eν )) then expansion( eν ) has an s-b

directed path avoiding t and thus b ∈ V (B), a contradiction, and if ba ∈ E(expansion( eν )) 

then expansion( eν ) has a b-t path avoiding s and thus b ∈ V (B), a contradiction. Therefore 

V (expansion( eν )) ⊆ V (B).Symmetrically we have V (expansion( eμ)) ⊆ V (B): we can apply the argument described above for the case when ν is an R-node since μ is an R-node. Since V (expansion( eμ)) ∪

V (expansion( eν )) = V (H) we have V (H) ⊆ V (B), and since superbubbles live within blocks we get V (B) = V (H), as desired. So s has out-neighbors only in one expansion between ν and μ and therefore the superbubble is contained in that expansion. By symmetry, t has in-neighbors in only one expansion, and it 25 is not hard to see that these expansions have to match. If the out-neighbors of s are contained in expansion( eν ) and ν is an S-node then Proposition 2 gives a contradiction, so ν is an R-node. Further, we have that B is acyclic, has no extremities of G except {s, t }, and ts / ∈ E(G),since (s, t ) is a superbubble. These conditions altogether are enough to report (s, t ) in Line 28 (when iterating over node μ if B ⊆ expansion( eμ) and over node ν if B ⊆ expansion( eν )). 

(Soundness.) Let (s, t ) be a pair of vertices reported by the algorithm. We show that (s, t ) is a superbubble of G.If the pair (s, t ) is reported in Line 5 or 7 then (s, t ) is a trivial superbubble by definition. If the pair (s, t ) is reported by virtue of Line 13 then H has exactly one source s and exactly one sink t (with respect to H), no vertex in H except {s, t } is a cutvertex of G, H is acyclic, 

N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (H), and ts / ∈ E(G). It is not hard to see that under these conditions the pair 

(s, t ) is a superbubbloid with graph H (a similar proof to that of Lemma 7 is possible and we omit it for the sake of brevity). Since H is 2-connected it has two internally vertex-disjoint s-t undirected paths, so Lemma 4 implies that (s, t ) is a superbubble. Now we discuss the case when {s, t } is a separation pair of a block H of G. By symmetry it suffices to show that the pairs reported in Lines 13, 15, and 28 are superbubbles. If (s, t )

is reported in Line 15 then Proposition 3 implies that (s, t ) is a superbubbloid with graph K;moreover, since K = ⋃ 

> e∈E+
> s

expansion( e) consists of the union of ℓ ≥ 2 split components of {s, t },

K has two internally vertex-disjoint s-t undirected paths, and hence Lemma 4 gives that (s, t ) is a superbubble. If (s, t ) is reported in Line 28 then the fact that (s, t ) is a superbubble follows at once by Proposition 4. If (s, t ) is reported in Line 13 then the pertaining node of the unique edge in E+

> s

is an R-node (as no two P-nodes are adjacent in T ), so we are conditions of applying Proposition 4 and conclude that (s, t ) is a superbubble. 

(Running time.) Block-cut trees can be built in linear time (Hopcroft and Tarjan, 1973b) and the total size of the blocks is linear in |V (G)| + |E(G)|. The case when a block is a multi-bridge is trivial, so suppose that we are analyzing a block H that is 2-connected. Let |H| := |V (H)|+|E(H)|.We show that the rest of the algorithm runs in time O(|H|), thus proving the desired bound. The conditions on Lines 11 and 12 are trivial and require O(|H|) time altogether. The SPQR tree T can be built in O(|H|) time (Gutwenger and Mutzel, 2001). Phases 1 and 2 take O(|H|)

time by Lemma 8. For Phase 3, recall first that T has O(|H|) P-nodes as well as tree-edges by Lemma 2. Further, notice that the work done in each P-node and in each tree-edge entering an R-node takes constant-time with exception of the inclusion-neighborhood queries of s and t. To handle this type of queries, we can proceed as follows. In order to decide inclusion-neighborhood queries, e.g., of vertices u and v, we process all edges of T with a DFS traversal starting in the root. Let ν be the parent of μ in T and let {u, v } denote the endpoints of eν and eμ. We store at u and v the number of their out- and in-neighbors in 

expansion( eμ). Assume that we have already computed this information (via the DFS order) for all tree edges to children of μ in T (if μ is not a leaf). For all such tree edges to children of μ

in which u is present, we increment the respective counts of u by these values, and same for v.Moreover, we scan every real edge in skeleton( μ) and use the neighborhoods induced by the edge to correspondingly increment the respective counts for u and v. Doing this, we process every real edge once because every edge of the input graph is a real edge in exactly one skeleton. Having the correct out- and in-neighborhood counts for u and v in expansion( eμ), we can obtain their counts in 

expansion( eν ) by subtracting from the total number of out-neighbors of u the value of out-neighbor counter of u in expansion( eμ) (and same for v). This can again be obtained by paying only constant time per edge. To conclude, for each P-node μ the algorithm spends O(|E(skeleton( μ)) |) time to build the sets 26 described in Proposition 3, and for tree-edges entering R-nodes the algorithm spends a constant amount of time. The latter thus requires O(|V (H)|) time altogether because T has O(|V (H)|)

R-nodes at most, and the former requires O(|H|) time altogether since the total number of edges in the skeletons of the nodes of T is O(|E(H)|) and T has O(|V (H)|) P-nodes (recall Lemma 2). 

# 5 Snarls 

5.1 Setup 

We assume, without loss of generality, that G = ( V, E ) is a connected bidirected graph. To give our equivalent snarl characterization we introduce more terminology. The splitting operation takes a bidirected graph G = ( V, E ) and a vertex-side uα and produces a new bidirected graph G′ = ( V ′, E ′)

with V ′ := V (G) ∪ { u′} and E′ := E(G) \ {{ uˆα, vβ } | { uˆα, vβ } ∈ E(G)} ∪ {{ u′ ˆα, vβ } | { uˆα, vβ } ∈ 

E(G)}. As a result, all edges incident to u with sign ˆα will be incident to u′ instead. 

Remark: In the remainder of this section we discuss two equivalent definitions of “snarls” and for the sake of our results this section can be skipped, only Definition 3 is required for the rest of the paper. Paten et al. (2018) define snarls via the biedged graph , an undirected graph B(G) = ( VB , E B )

constructed from a bidirected graph G = ( V, E ) as follows. We first split every vertex v ∈ V into two nodes v+ and v− (one per vertex-side), so that VB = {v+, v − | v ∈ V }. Then, for each v ∈ V ,we add an undirected inner edge {v+, v −} . Finally, for each bidirected edge {uα, vβ } ∈ E (with 

α, β ∈ { +, −} ), we add an undirected outer edge {uα, vβ } between the corresponding split nodes. This construction is illustrated in Figure 1(b). We call the endpoints of an inner edge opposites and denote by ˆx the opposite of a node x ∈ VB . If an inner edge has a parallel outer edge, we keep both edges (as distinct parallel edges). Otherwise, we assume without loss of generality that there are no parallel outer edges, since they do not affect snarls. Throughout, we write uα for a vertex-side (with α ∈ { +, −} ) and uˆα for its opposite vertex-side. In the biedged graph, Paten et al. define snarls as follows. 

Definition 2 (Snarls in biedged graphs) . An unordered pair of distinct, non-opposite nodes {a, b }

is a snarl if (a) separable: the removal of the inner edges incident with a and b (i.e., {a, ˆa} and {b, ˆb})disconnects the graph, creating a connected component X that contains a and b but neither ˆa

nor ˆb. We call X the snarl component of {a, b }.(b) minimal: no pair of opposites {z, ˆz} in X different from a and b exists such that {a, z } and 

{b, ˆz} are separable. 

To avoid using the biedged graph in our algorithm, we propose an equivalent definition of snarls in bidirected graphs. 

Definition 3 (Snarl, Snarl component) . A pair of vertex-sides {xα, yβ } with x̸ = y is a snarl in a bidirected graph G:(a) separability: the graph created by splitting the vertex-sides xα and yβ in G has a separate component X containing x and y but not the vertices x′ and y′ created by the split operation. We call X the snarl component of {xα, yβ }.(b) minimality: X has no vertex-sides zγ and zˆγ such that {xα, zγ } and {zˆγ, yβ } are separable in G.

27 Figure 9: Illustration of sign-cut graphs (Definition 4). (a) A bidirected graph G with three sign-consistent cutvertices               

> a,b,cand one non-sign-consistent cutvertex d(which has both +and −vertex-sides towards the same block). (b) The sign-cut graphs of Gafter splitting each sign-consistent vertex. Each split vertex appears as a tip in both copies. Note also that each pair of tips of a resulting a sign-cut graph of Gforms a snarl.

The equivalence of these two definitions should be clear. 

Lemma 9 (Equivalence of snarl definitions) . Let G be a bidirected graph and let B(G) be its biedged graph. Let {uα, vβ } be an unordered pair of vertex-sides of G (equivalently, an unordered pair of nodes of B(G)), with α, β ∈ { +, −} . Then {uα, vβ } is separable (resp. minimal, resp. a snarl) in G

by Definition 3 if and only if it is separable (resp. minimal, resp. a snarl) in B(G) by Definition 2. Proof. (Sketch) Deleting the inner edge {uα, u ˆα} in B(G) separates the node uα from its opposite 

uˆα while leaving all outer edges intact. This has the same effect on connectivity as splitting the vertex-side uα in G (which detaches all edges incident to uˆα from u by moving them to the new vertex u′). Applying the same argument to vβ yields the equivalence of separability. The minimality clauses translate verbatim, since “opposites” in G correspond exactly to the endpoints of an inner edge in B(G).

5.2 Sign-cut graphs and dangling blocks 

Let x be a cutvertex of G and let C1, . . . , C ℓ be the components of G − x. Then x is sign-consistent 

if x is a tip in G[V (Ci) + x] for i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ }.

Definition 4 (Sign-cut graphs, see Figure 9) . Let G be a bidirected graph and let Y ⊆ V (G) be the set of sign-consistent vertices of G. The sign-cut graphs of G are the graphs resulting from splitting each vertex y ∈ Y with any sign in {+, −} and relabeling each new vertex y′ as y.

Notice that if uα and vβ with u̸ = v are vertex-sides, then splitting uα and then vβ yields the same graph as splitting vβ and then uα , and so sign-cut graphs are well defined. A vertex is contained in two sign-cut graphs if and only if it is sign-consistent, and moreover every sign-consistent vertex becomes a tip in both sign-cut graphs it appears in (one with its 28 positive vertex-sides and the other with its negative vertex-sides). Sign-cut graphs partition the edges (and thus the vertex-sides) of G and the blocks of G coincide with the blocks of its sign-cut graphs. With this, we can already show a simple property of snarls. 

Lemma 10. Let G be a bidirected graph, let F1 and F2 be distinct sign-cut graphs of G, and let 

uα be a vertex-side of F1 and vβ a vertex-side of F2. Then {uα, vβ } is not a snarl of G.Proof. We can assume that u̸ = v for otherwise {uα, vβ } is not a snarl by definition. There is a sign-consistent vertex x ∈ V (G) that puts uα and vβ in distinct sign-cut graphs (possibly x = u

or x = v). Moreover, for some γ ∈ { +, −} , the edges of G incident to x containing a vertex-side 

xγ are all in F1 and those with a vertex-side xˆγ are all in F2, since x is sign-consistent. As such, splitting xγ in G results in a graph, say Gxγ , with two components: one containing x and u and the other containing x′ and v.Suppose that x is distinct from u and v and suppose for a contradiction that {uα, vβ } is a snarl with component X. We argue that {uα, xγ } is separable, and the fact that {vβ, x ˆγ} is separable follows symmetrically, thus contradicting the minimality of {uα, vβ }. Notice that splitting uα in 

Gxγ does not separate u and x, otherwise splitting uα in G separates u from v because every u-v

path in G contains x. Similarly, since u and v are in different components of Gxγ (or G − x), splitting uα separates u from u′. So u and x remain connected and become separated from u′ and 

x′.Suppose now that x is equal to u or v; say x = u without loss of generality, so xγ = uα . Then 

Gxγ has one component containing vertex u and another containing the vertices u′ and v. Further splitting vβ does not create paths between u and v (although it may separate u′ and v), so the pair 

{uα, vβ } is not separable and so it is not a snarl. Cutvertices that are not sign-consistent require additional care, as we show in the next result. Let v be a vertex in a block H. If H′ is a block distinct from H that contains v and has vertex-sides of opposite signs at v, then H′ is a dangling block of v with respect to H. For instance, non cutvertices have no dangling blocks. 

Proposition 5 (Dangling blocks, see Figure 10) . Let G be a bidirected graph, H be a block of G,and u, v ∈ V (H) be vertices. If u or v has dangling blocks with respect to H then {uα, vβ } is not separable for any signs α, β ∈ { +, −} .Proof. Without loss of generality suppose that u has a dangling block H′ with respect to H. So 

H′ has edges {u+, xγ } and {u−, yδ }. Notice that u is a cutvertex of G, since otherwise there is exactly one block containing u (which is H). Since H′ is a block, it has an x-y path avoiding u.Thus splitting uα results in a graph containing a u-u′ path whose internal vertices are contained in H′. Since u, v ∈ V (H) and no two blocks contain the same two vertices, v is not in H′ and so splitting vβ does not affect the path previously constructed. Therefore u and u′ remain connected in the graph resulting from splitting uα and vβ , in other words, {uα, vβ } is not separable. Our goal is to show an equivalence between the snarls of G and the snarls of its sign-cut graphs (Lemma 11), from where pinpointing all the snarls becomes easy (Theorem 8). 

Lemma 11. Let G be a bidirected graph, let {uα, vβ } be a pair of vertex-sides. Then {uα, vβ } is a snarl of G if and only if there is a sign-cut graph F of G such that {uα, vβ } is a snarl of F .

Theorem 8. Let G be a bidirected graph and let F be a sign-cut graph of G.

29 Figure 10: A dangling block H′ with respect to u and H (Proposition 5). (a) Block H′ (green) has both + and −            

> vertex-sides at u, while H(purple) has only +. (b) After splitting u+, the path through H′(blue) connects uto u′,so {uα, vβ }is not separable.

1. If u and v are distinct tips in F with signs α, β ∈ { +, −} , respectively, then {uα, vβ } is a snarl of G.2. If {uα, vβ } is a snarl of G and u and v are non-tips in F then there is a unique block of F

where u and v are non-tips and where {u, v } is a split pair. 

5.3 Properties of snarls 

In this section we give a series of technical results on snarls in order to prove Lemma 11 and Theorem 8. 

Proposition 6. Let G be a bidirected graph, F be a sign-cut graph of G, and u ∈ V (F ) be a vertex. If u is a non-tip in F then there is a block of F with vertex-sides of opposite signs in u.Proof. Suppose for a contradiction that, for every block of F , the vertex-sides of u have the same sign. If u is not a cutvertex in F then u is in a unique block of F and thus u is a tip, a contradiction. Otherwise u is a sign-consistent non-tip cutvertex of G, a contradiction to the fact that F is a sign-cut graph of G.Unlike superbubbles and cutvertices, we cannot argue that snarls do not contain sign-consistent vertices in their “interior” (e.g., the component of a snarl formed by two tips is the whole graph, and thus contains all sign-consistent vertices). Nonetheless, sign-cut graphs are useful because they give us a way to efficiently encode all the snarls (this will become clear later on when the snarl finding algorithm is given). 

Lemma 12. Let G be a connected bidirected graph and let {uα, vβ } be a snarl of G with component 

X. Then X = G if and only if u and v are tips in G with signs α, β ∈ { +, −} , respectively. Proof. (⇐) If u and v are tips in G with signs α and β then splitting uα and vβ results in a graph consisting of G plus two isolated vertices, u′ and v′. Since G is connected it follows that X = G.

(⇒) We show that if u or v are non-tips in G then X̸ = G (i.e., there is an edge or a vertex of 

G that is not part of X, as X ⊆ G by definition of snarl and snarl component). Suppose without loss of generality that α = + . Since u is a non-tip in G, G has an edge {u−, wγ }. Let G′ denote the graph resulting from splitting u+ and vβ .Suppose that w̸ = v. If w ∈ V (X) then X has a u-w path in X because components are connected. This path can be extended with the edge {wγ, u ′−} ∈ E(G′), and so there is a u-

u′ path in G′ and we have u′ ∈ V (X), contradicting the fact that {uα, vβ } is separable. Thus 

w / ∈ V (X) and so V (X)̸ = V (G).30 Suppose that w = v. Then γ = ˆβ, otherwise {uα, vβ } is not separable since u and u′ would be connected in G′ via v. Then the edge {u−, v ˆβ} of G (which becomes the edge {u′−, v ′ ˆβ} in G′) is not contained in X since u′, v ′ /∈ V (X), and therefore E(X)̸ = E(G).

Proposition 7. Let G be a bidirected graph and F be a sign-cut graph of G with vertices u and v.With respect to F , if u is a tip with sign α and v is a non-tip then {uα, vβ } is not separable for any β ∈ { +, −} .Proof. Since v is a non-tip in F we can apply Proposition 6 to get a block H of F containing edges 

{v+, zγ } and {v−, wδ }. So H has a z-w path p avoiding v (if H is 2-connected this follows from 2-connectivity, and if H is a multi-bridge then z = w and the path is trivial). Thus, splitting vβ for 

β ∈ { +, −} in F results in a graph where v and v′ are connected by p and the two edges incident to z and w (where v is appropriately changed to v′ in one of the edges). Splitting uα has no effect in this path as it only creates an isolated vertex u′, u being a tip. We are now ready to prove the two desired results. 

Lemma 11. Let G be a bidirected graph, let {uα, vβ } be a pair of vertex-sides. Then {uα, vβ } is a snarl of G if and only if there is a sign-cut graph F of G such that {uα, vβ } is a snarl of F .Proof. (⇒, separability ) Let {uα, vβ } be a separable pair of vertex-sides of G. Lemma 10 implies that the vertex-sides uα and vβ are contained in the same sign-cut graph of G, say F . Since F ⊆ G,it follows that {uα, vβ } is separable in F .

(⇐, separability ) Let {uα, vβ } be a separable pair of vertex-sides of F . If u and v are not sign-consistent vertices of G then the set of edges incident to u and v in G are all contained in F ,and thus the separability of {uα, vβ } in F clearly carries over to G.Otherwise u or v is a sign-consistent vertex of G, say u without loss of generality. By separability, splitting uα and vβ in F leaves u and v connected by a path (which is contained in F ), and since 

F ⊆ G splitting uα and vβ in G also leaves u and v connected at least by that same path. It remains to show that u and v become separated from u′ and v′ (in G). Since u is sign-consistent for G it is a tip in F with sign α, and thus Proposition 7 implies that 

v is a tip in F . Moreover, the edges with vertex-side uˆα (possibly none if u is also a tip in G)are all contained in another sign-cut graph. Thus, splitting uα in G amounts to disconnecting G

into two components, one containing the edges with vertex-sides uα and the other containing the edges with vertex-sides u′ ˆα, so u and v become disconnected from u′. Since v is a tip, v is either a sign-consistent vertex of G or a non-cutvertex tip of G. The latter case is trivial, and in the former we can argue as we did for u and conclude that splitting vβ results in a graph where v and u are disconnected from v′.

(⇐, minimality ) Let {uα, vβ } be a snarl in F . Suppose for a contradiction that G has vertex-sides wγ and wˆγ with w̸ = u, v such that {uα, wγ } and {vβ, w ˆγ} are separable in G. Then wγ is in 

F by Lemma 10 since otherwise {uα, wγ } is not separable in G. Moreover, by the separability result for the (⇒) direction given above, {uα, wγ } and {vβ, w ˆγ} are also separable in F , a contradiction to the minimality of {uα, vβ }. So {uα, vβ } is a snarl in G.

(⇒, minimality ) Let {uα, vβ } be a snarl in G. If F has vertex-sides wγ and wˆγ with w̸ = u, v 

such that {uα, wγ } and {vβ, w ˆγ} are separable in F , then by separability result for the (⇐) direction given above, {uα, wγ } and {vβ, w ˆγ} are also separable in G, a contradiction to the minimality of 

{uα, vβ }, and so {uα, vβ } is a snarl in F .

Theorem 8. Let G be a bidirected graph and let F be a sign-cut graph of G.

31 1. If u and v are distinct tips in F with signs α, β ∈ { +, −} , respectively, then {uα, vβ } is a snarl of G.2. If {uα, vβ } is a snarl of G and u and v are non-tips in F then there is a unique block of F

where u and v are non-tips and where {u, v } is a split pair. Proof. We prove the two items separately. 1. Let F ′ denote the graph resulting from splitting uα and vβ in F . Since u and v are tips in F

with signs α and β, respectively, F ′ consists of three components, which are F and the two isolated vertices u′ and v′. Hence, {uα, vβ } is separable. To see minimality, suppose for a contradiction that F has vertex-sides zγ and zˆγ with z / ∈{u, v } such that {uα, zγ } and {vβ, z ˆγ} are separable. If z is not a tip then neither {uα, zγ }

nor {vβ, z ˆγ} are separable by Proposition 7 (since u and v are tips by assumption). So z is a tip in F , without loss of generality, with sign γ. Splitting zˆγ results in z being isolated and further splitting vβ does not create new paths. Hence there is no v-z path in the graph resulting from these two splits and thus {vβ, z ˆγ} is not separable, a contradiction. Hence {uα, vβ } is a snarl of F , and by Lemma 11, of G too. 2. By Lemma 11 there is a sign-cut graph of G where {uα, vβ } is a snarl. Notice that u and 

v are not sign-consistent in G because they are non-tips in F . Therefore the only sign-cut graph containing these vertices is exactly F and thus {uα, vβ } is a snarl in F .First we show that there is a block of F containing the vertices u and v. Suppose otherwise. Because u is a non-tip in F we can apply Proposition 6 to conclude that there are edges 

{u+, zγ } and {u−, wδ } within a block of F . So there is a z-w path p in this block that avoids 

u. After splitting uα , one of {u+, zγ } and {u−, wδ } remains incident to u and the other becomes incident to u′, so u and u′ remain connected via p. Since v is in a different block than u by assumption, vertex v is not in p and so splitting vβ does not separate u from u′,contradicting the separability of {uα, vβ }. Hence u and v are in the same block of F , say H.Since {uα, vβ } is separable and u, v ∈ V (H), applying Proposition 5 to F, H, u, v implies that 

u and v have no dangling blocks with respect to H. Since u and v are non-tips in F by assumption and F is a sign-cut graph of G, it follows that H is the unique block of F that contains vertex-sides of different signs at u and v, in other words, u and v are non-tips only in H.We are left to show that {u, v } is a split pair of H. If {u, v } is an edge we are done, so suppose otherwise. Graph H has vertices x ∈ N + 

> H

(u) and y ∈ N − 

> H

(u) because u is a non-tip in H. Furthermore, since {u, v } is not an edge, both x and y are distinct from v. Clearly x

is contained in the snarl component of {uα, vβ } and y is not. So if {u, v } is not a separation pair of H then H − { u, v } has an x-y path and therefore the graph resulting from splitting 

uα and vβ in F has a u-u′ path, contradicting the separability of {uα, vβ }.Lemma 11 has a convenient consequence for arguing on the minimality of separable vertex-sides. If {uα, vβ } is separable in F then in order to show that it is a snarl in G it is enough that no vertex-side in F violates minimality, even if the component of {uα, vβ } in G spans over F . This may the case if at least one vertex between u and v is a tip in F , for instance, if F has three sign-consistent vertices of G then any two of these vertices (together with the obvious signs) form a snarl whose component spans over F . Further, minimality is trivial to check in this case as it is shown in the proof of (1) of Theorem 8. On the other hand it is not hard to see that in the other case, i.e., non-tip with non-tip snarls, the component is contained in F . For these we give a result showing that the vertex-sides are in the block H where both u and v appear, i.e., they are not contained in the blocks “attached” to H by u or v.32 5.4 The snarl finding algorithm 

In this section we develop an algorithm to find snarls whose vertices form a separation pair of a block of G. Since snarls are only defined by their separability and minimality, it is not required to maintain any partial information during the algorithm. In fact, most of our effort is devoted to understanding where and how snarls arise in the different nodes of the SPQR tree. We start by giving a useful result for showing minimality of separable pairs of vertex-sides. Then we show results giving (mostly) sufficient conditions for a snarl to exist within the different types of nodes of the SPQR tree. Finally we present our algorithm and give a correctness proof. 

Proposition 8. Let G be a bidirected graph and let uα and vβ be vertex-sides of G such that 

{uα, vβ } is separable with component X. If X has two internally vertex-disjoint u-v paths then 

{uα, vβ } is a snarl. Proof. Suppose for a contradiction that X has vertex-sides wγ and wˆγ such that {uα, wγ } and 

{vβ, w ˆγ} are separable. Since w̸ = u, v , at least one of p1, p 2 avoids w; assume without loss of generality that p2 avoids w, and let C be the connected component of X − w containing u and v.Since {vβ, w ˆγ} is separable, the graph obtained by splitting vβ and wˆγ has a v-w path. Let 

{xδ, w ˆγ} be the last edge of such a path (so x is the predecessor of w in the path). Then x is reachable from v in G − w and, since the edge {xδ, w ˆγ} is also present in the graph obtained by splitting uα and vβ , we have x ∈ V (X).If x / ∈ V (C) then x lies in a component of X − w disjoint from {u, v }, whose vertices (being in X \ { u, v }) have no neighbors outside X; thus x would not be reachable from v in G − w, a contradiction. Therefore x ∈ V (C).Now split uα and wγ , and let w′ denote the vertex created by splitting wγ (so w′ is incident to the edges originally incident to wˆγ). The component C contains a u-x path avoiding w; since it is contained in X, it starts at u with a uα vertex-side and is preserved by the split of uα . Further, the edge {xδ, w ˆγ} becomes incident to w′. Hence u reaches w′, contradicting the separability of 

{uα, wγ }.Therefore no such w exists and {uα, vβ } is minimal, and so is a snarl. 

S-, P-, and R-nodes The technique to find snarls within S-nodes is similar to the technique used to define sign-cut graphs. Let μ be an S-node and consider a fixed cyclical order of the edges of skeleton( μ). Say that v ∈ skeleton( μ) is good if the vertex-sides at v in the expansion of the edge to the left of v all have sign α ∈ { +, −} and those in the expansion of the edge to its right have sign ˆα at v, and there are no dangling blocks with respect to H at v. We show that the consecutive pairs formed by these vertex-sides in the obvious way form snarls. 

Proposition 9 (Snarls and S-nodes, see Figure 11(a)) . Let G be a bidirected graph, H be a 2-connected subgraph of G, T be the SPQR tree of H, and μ be an S-node of T . Suppose that 

skeleton( μ) has vertices v0, . . . , v k−1 and edges e0, . . . , e k−1 with the endpoints of ei being vi and 

v(i+1 mod k) (k ≥ 3) . Let vi1 , . . . , v iq be the good vertices of μ with q ≥ 2 listed in the order such that i1 < · · · < i q (i1, . . . , i q ⊆ { 0, . . . , k − 1}), and let ˆαij , α ij ∈ { +, −} denote the signs of the vertex-sides at vij in expansion( e(ij −1) mod k) and expansion( eij ), respectively, with j ∈ { 1, . . . , q }.Then {vi1 αi1 , v i2 ˆαi2 }, . . . , {viq αiq , v i1 ˆαi1 } are snarls. Proof. For conciseness, let u = vij , α = αij , v = vi(j+1) mod q , and β = βi(j+1) mod q , for an arbitrary 

j ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , q }. For separability, first note that after obtaining graph G′ by splitting uα and v ˆβ

in G, there remains a path from u to v through the edges of 

E

> (

expansion( eij )

> )

∪ E

> (

expansion( e(ij +1) mod k)

> )

∪ · · · ∪ E

> (

expansion 

> (

e(−1+ i(j+1) mod q ) mod k

> ))

.

33 It remains to show that u does not reach u′ and v does not reach v′ in G′. All vertex-sides of u′

are in E

(

expansion( e(ij −1) mod k)

)

and all the vertex-sides of v′ are in E

(

expansion( ei(j+1) mod q )

)

.Further, there are no u′α or v′ ˆβ vertex-sides because of splitting. Without loss of generality, assume for contradiction that there is a u-u′ path p in U (G′). There then has to exist a last vertex a on the path p and its (not necessarily immediate) successor b with the property that a is {u′, v ′} or in 

V

(

expansion( ei(j+1) mod q )

)

∪V

(

expansion( e(1+ i(j+1) mod q ) mod k)

)

∪· · ·∪ V

(

expansion 

(

e(ij −1) mod k

)) 

with a̸ ∈ { u, v }, and b is in 

V

(

expansion( eij )

)

∪ V

(

expansion( e(ij +1) mod k)

)

∪ · · · ∪ V

(

expansion 

(

e(−1+ i(j+1) mod q ) mod k

)) 

.

By the definition of splitting, it cannot be the case that a = v′ and b = v, since there are no edges between v and v′ and we have no dangling blocks. Similarly, it cannot be that a = u′ and b = u.On the other hand, we must have either a = v′ and b = v or a = u′ and b = u, because we are operating within an S-node. By the contradiction, u does not reach u′ and v does not reach v′ in 

G′.For minimality, suppose for a contradiction that there is are vertex-sides wγ and wˆγ with 

w̸ = u, v in the component of {uα, v ˆβ} such that {uα, wγ } and {wˆγ, v ˆβ} are separable. Clearly, 

w does not have dangling blocks with respect to H by Proposition 5. It also must be that w is a vertex of the S-node, since a necessary condition for separability is that there cannot be a path that starts with w+ vertex-side and ends with w− vertex-side and does not pass through u or v.Let thus w = vl. Since we assumed that w is not a good vertex and there are no dangling blocks, either expansion( el) or expansion( e(l−1) mod k) has both w+ and w− vertex-sides. Without loss of generality, assume this to be el. Then, the non-separability of {uα, w ˆγ} follows by there being a path from w and w′ to v if we split uα and wˆγ.For P-nodes we can give a characterization of separability, similarly to Proposition 3 and su-perbubbloids. 

Proposition 10 (Snarls and P-nodes, , see Figure 11(b)) . Let G be a bidirected graph, F be a sign-cut graph of G, and H be a 2-connected subgraph of F with SPQR tree T . Let μ be a P-node of T whose skeleton has edges e1, . . . , e k with endpoints {u, v } (k ≥ 3) . Let α, β ∈ { +, −} . Let 

Eαu = {ei : V (expansion( ei)) ∩ N αH (u)̸ = ∅} and Eβv = {ei : V (expansion( ei)) ∩ N βH (v)̸ = ∅} . Then 

{uα, vβ } is separable in F if and only if Eαu̸ = ∅, Eαu ∩ E ˆαu = ∅, Eβv ∩ E ˆβv = ∅, Eαu = Eβv , and u and 

v have no dangling blocks with respect to H.Proof. (⇒) Suppose that {uα, vβ } is separable in F with component X. We show that each condition described in the statement holds. If u and v are tips in F with signs α and β, respectively, then each condition clearly holds (notice that we do not impose E ˆαu̸ = ∅ in the conditions of the statement). By Proposition 7 a tip and a non-tip do not form a separable pair, so we can assume that u and v are both non-tips in F .By Proposition 5 it follows that u and v have no dangling blocks since {uα, vβ } is separable. We show that the remaining conditions hold. If Eαu = ∅ then H has no vertex-sides of u with sign α. Since F is a sign-cut graph, there is a block of F containing opposite vertex-sides of u, for otherwise u is a non-tip and a sign-consistent vertex in F , contradicting the fact that F is a sign-cut graph of G. In other words, u has a dangling block with respect to H, contradicting that u has no dangling blocks. Therefore Eαu̸ = ∅.34 If e ∈ Eαu ∩ E ˆαu then expansion( e) has edges {uα, xγ } and {uˆα, yδ }. Notice that x, y ̸ = v by construction of the P-nodes: a real edge with endpoints u and v would constitute a split component of {u, v } and thus would be represented alone by an edge in skeleton( μ). Now, expansion( e) has an x-y path avoiding u and v since otherwise x and y are in different split components of μ,contradicting the fact that x, y ∈ V (expansion( e)) . So the graph resulting from splitting uα and vβ 

has a u-u′ path, a contradiction. Thus Eαu ∩E ˆαu = ∅, and symmetrically we can deduce Eβv ∩E ˆβv = ∅.If Eαu̸ = Eβv then, without loss of generality, there is an edge e ∈ Eαu \Eβv . Since Eαu ∩E ˆαu = ∅ and 

Eβv ∩ E ˆβv = ∅, it follows that every vertex-side of expansion( e) in v has sign ˆβ. Since expansion( e)

is connected, it has a uα -v ˆβ path p (which avoid the vertex-sides uˆα and vβ , since it is a path). By the separability of {uα, vβ }, its component contains u and v and does not contain u′ and v′,but p connects u and v′, and thus v and v′ are connected, a contradiction. Therefore Eαu = Eβv .

(⇐) If Eαu̸ = ∅, Eαu ∩ E ˆαu = ∅, Eβv ∩ E ˆβv = ∅, Eαu = Eβv , and u and v have no dangling blocks with respect to H, then the separability of {uα, vβ } follows at once.                     

> Figure 11: Finding nontip-nontip snarls in the three types of SPQR tree nodes. Real edges are solid gray and virtual edges are dashed. (a) S-node: vertices eand f(green) have opposite signs on their two adjacent edges and are the only “good” vertices (see Proposition 9), yielding the snarl {e−, f +}.(b) P-node: the signs at aand bpartition across the parallel edges, yielding {a+, b −} . (c) Adjacent R-nodes: the signs at cand dpartition across the boundary, yielding {c+, d −} and {c−, d +}. In all cases, the reversed sign counterpart is also a snarl.

Proposition 11 (Snarls and R-nodes, see Figure 11(c)) . Let G be a bidirected graph, H be a 2-connected subgraph of G, T be the SPQR tree of H, and ν, μ be adjacent nodes in T . Let eμ =

{u, v } ∈ E(skeleton( ν)) be the virtual edge pertaining to μ and eν = {u, v } ∈ E(skeleton( μ)) be the virtual edge pertaining to ν. Let α, β ∈ { +, −} . If ν is an R-node and all vertex-sides at u and v

in expansion( eν ) have signs α and β, respectively, and all vertex-sides at u and v in expansion( eμ)

have signs ˆα and ˆβ, respectively, and u and v have no dangling blocks with respect to H, then 

{uα, vβ } is a snarl. Proof. Let G′ denote the graph after splitting uα and vβ . Since u and v have no dangling blocks with respect to H, for each block H′̸ = H that intersects u, the vertex-side of H′ at u all have the same sign, and the same for v. So the blocks in G′ containing uα vertex-sides remain attached to 

u and those with uˆα vertex-sides are reattached to u′, and the same for v. Thus u and u′ are not connected in G′ via any of these blocks, and the same for v and v′. Now, the fact that u and v are separated from u′ and v′ in G′ follows from the fact that the tree-edge {ν, μ } encodes a separation of H where one side contains all vertex-sides of G at u and v of signs α and β, respectively, and the other side contains those with signs ˆα and v ˆβ. Finally, the fact that u and v remain connected follows from the fact that expansion( eν ) is connected. Therefore {uα, vβ } is separable. For minimality notice that expansion( eν ) has two internally vertex-disjoint uα -vβ paths since 

skeleton( ν) is 3-connected. So the component of {uα, vβ } in G′ containing u and v also contains these two paths and thus we can apply Proposition 8 to conclude that {uα, vβ } is a snarl. 35 Correctness and running time The next results are merely technical tools used in the com-pleteness part of Theorem 9 to exclude mixed-sign configurations incident to R-nodes, and for an edge-case arising in the proof. 

Proposition 12. Let G be a bidirected graph, H be a 2-connected subgraph of G, and T be the SPQR tree of H. Let ν be a node of T such that skeleton( ν) has a virtual edge eμ = {u, v } pertaining to an R-node μ. If expansion( eμ) has opposite vertex-sides at u, then {uα, vβ } is not separable for any α, β ∈ { +, −} .Proof. By assumption, expansion( eμ) has edges {uα, xγ } and {uˆα, yδ }. Notice that vertex x is contained in the expansion of a virtual edge ex ∈ skeleton( μ) where u is an endpoint, and analo-gously for y with edge ey where u is also an endpoint. Since u and v are not both the endpoints of these virtual edges as x, y ∈ expansion( eμ), we have that the other endpoint of ex, say x′, is distinct from v; similarly, the other endpoint of ey, say y′, is distinct from v. Now notice that 

expansion( ex) has an x − x′ path avoiding u by Lemma 3, and analogously expansion( ey) has a y-y′

path avoiding u. Since these paths are contained in expansion( ex) and expansion( ey), respectively, and v / ∈ V (expansion( ex)) , V (expansion( ey)) , they also avoid v. Moreover, skeleton( μ) has an x′-y′

path avoiding u and v because the skeleton of R-nodes is 3-connected. Therefore, expansion( eμ)

has an x-y path avoiding u and v and thus the graph resulting from splitting uα and vβ has a u-u′

path, and therefore {uα, vβ } is not separable. 

Proposition 13. Let G be a bidirected graph, F be a sign-cut graph of G, H be a block of F

containing the vertices u and v, and let {uα, vβ } be a snarl of F . If u and v are non-tips in 

H, {u, v } is an edge of H, and {u, v } is not a separation pair of H, then either e = {uα, vβ } ∈ 

E(H) and all vertex-sides at u and v except for those in e have signs ˆα and ˆβ, respectively, or 

e = {uˆα, v ˆβ} ∈ E(H) and all vertex-sides at u and v except for those in e have signs α and β,respectively. Proof. First notice that {uα, v ˆβ}, {uˆα, vβ }̸ ∈ E(H), since otherwise splitting uα and vβ results in a graph with an edge {u, v ′} or {u′, v }, contradicting the separability of {uα, vβ }.If e = {uα, vβ } ∈ E(H) then we can pick an edge {uˆα, xγ } ∈ E(H) since u is a non-tip in 

H. Suppose for a contradiction that H has an edge {uα, yδ }̸ = e. Since {u, v } is not a separation pair of H, H has an x-y path avoiding u and v. This path remains after splitting uα and vβ , thus violating separability between u and u′, a contradiction. Therefore all vertex-sides at u except for the one in e have signs ˆα, and we can argue symmetrically to conclude the same for v and ˆβ.Otherwise we have e = {uˆα, v ˆβ} ∈ E(H) and we proceed identically as above to conclude that all vertex-sides at u and v except for those in e have signs α and β, respectively. We can now present the correctness proof of Algorithm 9. 

Theorem 9. Let G be a bidirected graph. The algorithm identifying snarls (Algorithm 9) is correct, that is, it identifies all snarls of G and only its snarls. Proof. (Completeness.) We argue that every snarl of G is reported by the algorithm. Let {uα, vβ } be a snarl of G. By Lemma 11 there is a sign-cut graph F of G where {uα, vβ }

is also a snarl. By Proposition 7 it follows that either u and v are both tips or both non-tips in F . If u and v

are both tips then the snarl in question is encoded in the list described in Line 7 of Algorithm 9 (in Ti every two vertex-sides form a snarl). Otherwise u and v are both non-tips in F . By (2) of Theorem 8 it follows that there is a unique block of F , say H, where u and v are both non-tips and where {u, v } is a split pair. Let T denote the SPQR tree of H.36 If {u, v } is a separation pair of H then Lemma 1 implies that T has an edge {ν, μ } corresponding to the separation pair {u, v } or T has an S-node where u and v are nonadjacent in the skeleton. Therefore it is enough to analyze all the S- and P-nodes individually, and the tree-edges between R-nodes. Importantly, we remark that the current assumptions do not exclude the possibility that 

{u, v } is an edge of H. We discuss each of the possible cases. 1. Suppose that μ is an S-node of T such that {u, v } ⊆ V (skeleton( μ)) . If u and v are good in μ

and consecutive in the (circular) list of good vertices then {uα, vβ } is reported in Line 13. If 

u and v are good in μ and not consecutive in the (circular) list of good vertices, then there is a good vertex w in between u and v such that wγ and wˆγ are vertex-sides violating minimality of {uα, vβ } (see the proof of Proposition 9), a contradiction to the fact that {uα, vβ } is a snarl. If u or v is not good then we require a careful argument for which we do case analysis. Suppose without loss of generality that u is not good. (a) Suppose that there is an edge e = {u, w } ∈ E(skeleton( μ)) with w̸ = v such that 

expansion( e) has opposite vertex-sides at u. Then expansion( e) has edges {uα, aγ } and 

{uˆα, bδ }, and notice that a, b ̸ = v because w̸ = v. Let w be the first vertex in skeleton( μ)

on an a-v path in expansion( e) that avoids u (such a path exists by Lemma 3). Due to the structure of S-nodes, doing the same reasoning for b also yields vertex w. Then H

has an a-b path avoiding v, and also avoiding u by construction. So the graph resulting from splitting uα and vβ has an a-b path and thus it has a u-u′ path, a contradiction. (b) Otherwise the only edge witnessing the fact that u is not good is the edge e = {u, v } ∈ 

skeleton( μ). If v is good then it is not hard to see that {uα, vβ } is not separable, again, by two applications of Lemma 3 to the out- and in-neighbor of u in expansion( e) (where the vertex to be avoided is u). If v is not good and there is an edge distinct from e in 

skeleton( μ) witnessing this fact, then we can argue for v as we did in item (1a) for u

and contradict the separability of {uα, vβ }. The last case is thus when both u and v

are not good and e is the only edge such that expansion( e) has opposite vertex-sides at 

u and v, and the other two edges of skeleton( μ) incident to u and v are such that their expansions have only vertex-sides of the same sign at u and v. If the pertaining node of 

e is an R-node then Proposition 12 gives a contradiction to the separability of {uα, vβ }.Since no two S-nodes are adjacent in T the pertaining node of e is a P-node and the snarl is reported once P-nodes are analyzed as shown next in item (2). 2. Suppose that μ is a P-node of T such that V (skeleton( μ)) = {u, v }. Since {uα, vβ } is separable, Proposition 10 implies that the conditions described in the statement hold. Suppose that |Eαu | = 1 and let e be the unique edge in Eαu . If e pertains to an S-node then notice that 

u and v are good and that no other vertex is good, since otherwise a contradiction to the minimality of {uα, vβ } follows (to see in detail why, see the proof of Proposition 9). Thus 

{uα, vβ } is reported when S-nodes are analyzed. If e does not pertain to an S-node then e is a real edge or it pertains to an R-node. So the snarl is reported in Line 13 (symmetrically, Line 17) and the same if |Eαu | > 1.Notice the following observation concerning vertices that do not form a separation pair but form an edge of H.

Observation 10. If skeleton( μ) has two real edges {uα, vβ } and {uˆα, v ˆβ} and one virtual edge pertaining to an S-node whose expansion contains only vertex-sides at u and v with signs 

α and β, respectively, then the snarl {uα, vβ } is reported in Line 13 of Algorithm 6. 

3. Suppose that μ is an R-node of T with a virtual edge {u, v }. If the pertaining node ν of this virtual edge is an S- or a P-node then {uα, vβ } was reported before. So ν is an R-node. We claim that the vertex-sides in expansion( eν ) all have the same sign in u, and those in 37 expansion( eμ) all have the opposite sign in u, and the same for v. Suppose for a contradiction (and without loss of generality) that expansion( eμ) has vertex-sides of opposite signs at u.Then Proposition 12 gives a contradiction to the fact that {uα, vβ } is separable. Now notice that the conditions just established on the vertex-sides of u and v are precisely those described in Algorithm 7 and thus the snarl is reported in Line 11 when the assignments to the sign variables α and β match those of the snarl. Otherwise {u, v } is an edge of H and is not a separation pair of H, so we are in conditions of applying Proposition 13 from where two cases follow. We have e = {uα, vβ } ∈ E(H) and all vertex-sides at u and v except for those in e have signs ˆα, ˆβ, respectively, or e = {uˆα, v ˆβ} ∈ E(H)

and all vertex-sides at u and v except for those in e have signs α, β , respectively. In the former case the snarl {uα, vβ } is reported in Line 3. In the latter case the snarl {uα, vβ } is reported in Line 5 (where the signs are written with the respective opposites) if also no S-node of T contains both u

and v. So we are left to argue the case when T has an S-node σ whose skeleton contains both u

and v. Our goal now is to contradict the fact {uα, vβ } is a snarl or to show that it is reported in another phase of the algorithm. Notice that u and v are adjacent in skeleton( σ) because {u, v } is an edge of H, so let e = {u, v } ∈ 

E(skeleton( σ)) . Let eu, e v̸ = e denote the edges incident to u and v in skeleton( σ), respectively. We do case analysis on the type of e.1. If e is a real edge then the snarl is reported when S-nodes are analyzed: u and v are classified as good vertices due to the assumption on the vertex-sides and moreover they are consecutive in the circular list of good vertices since they are adjacent in skeleton( σ).2. Otherwise e is a virtual edge. Since {u, v } is not a separation pair the pertaining node of e

necessarily is a P-node, say π, such that skeleton( π) consists of exactly two real edges and one virtual edge (which pertains to σ). Indeed, if skeleton( π) has three real edges then it is not hard to see that {uα, vβ } is not separable, and if skeleton( π) has at least two virtual edges then {u, v } is a separation pair, both leading to a contradiction. By the assumption on the vertex-sides at u and v, we have that {uα, vβ } and {uˆα, v ˆβ} are the real edges of 

skeleton( σ), and that the vertex-sides contained in expansion( eu) all have sign α and those contained in expansion( ev) have sign β. But then we are exactly in the conditions described in Observation 10, and thus the snarl is reported when P-nodes are analyzed. All cases were examined and so every snarl of G is reported by the algorithm. 

(Soundness.) We argue that the algorithm only reports snarls. By Lemma 11, if {uα, vβ } is a snarl in a sign-cut graph of G then it is also a snarl in G. Thus, let F denote the sign-cut graph where the pair {uα, vβ } is reported. We show that {uα, vβ } is separable and minimal in F .If uα and vβ are vertex-sides of the set built in Line 7 of Algorithm 9 then u and v are both tips in F . By (1) of Theorem 8 it follows that {uα, vβ } is a snarl and thus the set Ti only encodes snarls. If {uα, vβ } is reported by virtue of Line 13 of Algorithm 5 then uα and vβ are consecutive elements of W and u̸ = v. Moreover, the conditions expressed in Algorithm 5 identify all and only good vertices. Thus Proposition 9 implies that {uα, vβ } is a snarl. If {uα, vβ } and {uˆα, v ˆβ} are reported in Line 11 of Algorithm 7 then Proposition 11 implies that {uα, vβ } is a snarl: the conditions of the statement match those in the algorithm. Applying Proposition 11 symmetrically to the other R-node implies that {uˆα, v ˆβ} is a snarl. If {uα, vβ } is reported in Algorithm 6 then Proposition 10 implies that {uα, vβ } is separable. Without loss of generality we argue on the minimality for Line 13. If |Eαu | > 1 then the component containing u and v after splitting uα and vβ in F has two internally vertex-disjoint u-v paths (this is easily seen from the structure of P-nodes), so we can apply Proposition 8 and conclude that 38 {uα, vβ } is a snarl. Otherwise we have |Eαu | = 1 . If the unique edge in Eαu is real then {uα, vβ } is clearly a snarl, and otherwise it is virtual and it pertains to an R-node since no two P-nodes are adjacent in T and if it is an S-node the algorithm does not report anything. Notice now that we are in conditions of applying Proposition 11, i.e., the conditions on the sets described in Proposition 10 can be reinterpreted and plugged into Proposition 11, from where we can conclude that {uα, vβ }

is a snarl. If {uα, vβ } is reported in Line 3 then the pair is clearly a snarl whose component has vertex set {u, v }. If {uˆα, v ˆβ} is reported in Line 5 then u and v are non-tips and no skeleton of an S-node of T contains the vertices u and v. Clearly {uˆα, v ˆβ} is separable, so we are left to argue minimality. Since {u, v } is an edge of U (H), T has a node whose skeleton contains the real edge 

{u, v }. This node is thus a P- or an R-node, and so H has three internally vertex-disjoint u-v paths (the existence of these paths is easily seen from the description of the P- and R-nodes, nonetheless we point to Lemma 2 of (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1996b)). One of these paths consists of the edge {uα, vβ }, and thus H has two internally vertex-disjoint uˆα-v ˆβ paths because no edge in F

distinct from e has a vertex-side uα or vβ . So splitting uˆα and v ˆβ in F results in a graph with a component containing u and v which has two internally vertex-disjoint u-v paths and hence we can apply Proposition 8 to conclude that {uˆα, v ˆβ} is a snarl. Every line where the algorithm reports a pair of vertex-sides is analyzed and therefore the algorithm only reports snarls. 

Theorem 2. Given a bidirected graph G, there exists a representation of the set of all snarls of G

consisting of sets T1, T 2, . . . , T k and S1, S 2, . . . , S ℓ, where 1. each Ti is a set of vertex-sides of G, and any pair of vertex-sides in Ti identifies a snarl of G;2. each Si is a pair of vertex-sides {uα, vβ } identifying a snarl of G;3. ∑ki=1 |Ti| = O(|V (G)|) and ∑ℓi=1 |Si| = O(|V (G)|).Moreover, this representation can be computed in time O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|).Proof. First we argue that Algorithm 9 runs in linear-time. Block-cut trees can be built in linear time (Hopcroft and Tarjan, 1973b) and the total size of the blocks is linear in |V (G)| + |E(G)|. We also find the sign-cut graphs in linear time, since we only need to identify the sign-consistent cutvertices of the block-cut tree. We can suppose that we are analyzing a block H that is 2-connected, since the other cases are trivial to check. Let 

|H| = |V (H)| + |E(H)|. We show that the rest of the algorithm runs in time O(|H|), thus proving the desired bound. After building the SPQR tree T of H, which can be built in O(|H|) time (Gutwenger and Mutzel, 2001), the algorithm examines each of the possible node types. By examination of Algorithms 5 to 7 we conclude that the work done is at most linear in the size of the skeleton of the node, except for the neighborhood queries, which we must support in constant-time. But these neighborhood queries can easily be supported in constant-time, exactly how it was described in Theorem 7. Now we argue that the representation of the snarls has the desired size. The bound on the tip-tip snarls follows from the fact that the sum of tips over all sign-cut graphs of G is at most 

O(|V (G)|). For each 2-connected block H examined by the algorithm, the total number of vertices over all skeletons of the SPQR tree of H is O(|V (H)|) (see (Di Battista and Tamassia, 1996b, Lemma 5)) and that SPQR tree has O(|V (H)|) edges (recall Lemma 2), and it is not hard to see that H contributes with O(|V (H)|) many (explicitly) listed snarls to S (the edge-snarls case takes constant time with linear-time preprocessing on the S-nodes and the neighborhoods of the vertices therein). Finally, within each sign-cut graph Fi we have ∑   

> Hblock of Fi

|V (H)| = O(|V (Fi)|), and each vertex of G appears in at most two sign-cut graphs. Hence ∑ℓj=1 |Sj | = O(|V (G)|).39 6 Ultrabubbles 

6.1 Setup 

Ultrabubbles are snarls with two additional superbubble-like conditions. 

Definition 5 (Ultrabubble and Ultrabubble component (Paten et al., 2018)) . Let G be a bidirected graph. Let {uα, vβ } be a pair of vertex-sides with distinct u, v ∈ V (G) and α, β ∈ { +, −} . Then 

{uα, vβ } is an ultrabubble if: (a) separable: the graph created by splitting uα and vβ contains a separate component X ⊆ G

containing u and v but not u′ and v′. We call X the ultrabubble component of {uα, vβ }.(b) tipless: no vertex in V (X) \ { u, v } is a tip. (c) acyclic: X is acyclic. (d) minimal: no vertex-side wγ with vertex w ∈ X \ { u, v } is such that {uα, wγ } and {wˆγ, vβ }

are separable. 

The interior of a separable pair of vertex-sides {uα, vβ } with component K is the vertex set 

V (K) \ { u, v }. A trivial ultrabubble is an ultrabubble whose interior is empty. It should be clear that the analogues of Lemma 5 and Theorem 6 hold for ultrabubbles, as their proofs are a simple adaptation from directed to bidirected graphs. So ultrabubbles are confined to blocks, and any ultrabubble is either trivial, the whole graph, or induces a separation pair. Moreover, also an analogue of Lemma 4 holds for ultrabubbles (see Lemma 4 of (Harviainen et al., 2026)). The algorithm we propose is essentially the same as the one to find superbubbles presented in Section 4, having only a few major differences. 

6.2 The ultrabubble finding algorithm 

The algorithm starts by computing the blocks of the input bidirected graph G. For each block H

of G it builds its SPQR tree T and therein it runs two graph traversals akin to phases one and two of the superbubbles algorithm. The algorithm maintains the following information. Let node ν be the parent of node μ in T , eμ and eν the usual edges, and X := expansion( eμ).

• State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] := True iff no vertex in V (X) \ { s, t } is an extremity of G.

• State ν,μ [Acyclic ] := 

> 

Null , if State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is false, 

True , otherwise, if X is acyclic, 

False , otherwise. As for the reachability states, since we are working with bidirected graphs now we store four kinds of reachability. So for all α, β ∈ { +, −} we define the following states. 

• State ν,μ [Reaches uv αβ ] := 

> 

Null , if State ν,μ [Acyclic ] is False or Null ,

True , otherwise, if X has an sα -tβ path, 

False , otherwise. The skeleton * construct defined for directed graphs naturally extends to bidirected graphs as fol-lows. For all α, β ∈ { +, −} let Bαβ = {{ siα, t iβ} : expansion( ei) has an siα-tiβ path, for i = 1 , . . . , k }.The bidirected skeleton of μ is the graph skeleton *(μ) := ( V (skeleton( μ)) , B ++ ∪B+− ∪B−+ ∪B−− ).We are now ready to proceed with the description of the phases. Some correctness details are omitted since they are just a straightforward adaptation of the proofs described in Section 4.1. 40 Phase 1. Recall that ν is the parent of μ in T . Let {u, v } denote the endpoints of eν and 

eμ. Phase 1 is also a DFS starting at the root of T and updates the states pointing downwards from the root. The update of State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is identical to that for superbubbles. The update of State ν,μ [Acyclic ] is also identical to that for superbubbles up to the point where graph 

K := skeleton *(μ) − { u+, v +} − { u+, v −} − { u−, v +} − { u−, v −} can be built. So at this point we have that State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is True and the states pointing from μ to its children all have the acyclicity state set to True . Clearly, as for directed graphs, State ν,μ [Acyclic ] is True if K is acyclic and is False otherwise. Our aim is to use DFS in order to decide acyclicity, but before that we make some observations regarding bidirected graphs and the structure of K.First notice that for any two vertices x, y ∈ V (K) there is at most one edge with endpoints 

{x, y } for otherwise K has a cycle. This is justified in the next result (essentially, the obvious fact that a directed graph contains a cycle whenever two of its vertices reach each other generalizes to bidirected graphs). 

Proposition 14. Let G be a bidirected graph, u, v ∈ V (G) be vertices, and α, β ∈ { +, −} . If G

has a uα -vβ and a uˆα-v bidirected path then G has a cycloid. Proof. Let x̸ = u be the closest vertex to u where these two paths intersect (possibly x = v). Let 

p1 denote the first path and p2 the second. The subpath of p1 from uα up to x concatenated with the reversed subpath of p2 from uˆα up to x forms a cycloid: if the vertex-side at x in the subpath of 

p1 has a different sign than that at x in the subpath of p2 then we have a cycloid with alternation at every vertex, and otherwise we have a cycloid where only x does not respect alternation. Furthermore, notice that if K has at most one tip then it has a cycloid (this is clear if G is directed since every directed acyclic graph contains a source and a sink, i.e., it contains two tips). See (Harviainen et al., 2026) for a proof of the next result. 

Proposition 15. Let G be a bidirected graph having at least two vertices. If G has at most one tip then G has a cycloid. 

Suppose now that K has at least three tips, so pick x to be a tip which moreover is distinct from the vertices u and v. Then the vertex-sides contained in the expansions of the edges incident to x in 

skeleton( μ) all have sign α for some α ∈ { +, −} . Suppose otherwise and let e = {x, y } ∈ skeleton( μ)

be an edge incident to x (possibly y = u or y = v). Then expansion( e) has vertex-sides of opposite signs at x. Since expansion( e) has no extremities except possibly x and y, expansion( e) has at most one tip, which is y, and thus it has a cycloid by Proposition 15, a contradiction (recall that the fact that we build K implies in particular that expansion( e) is acyclic). Therefore State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ]

is False because x is a tip in expansion( eμ), a contradiction. Therefore K has exactly two tips, which are u and v. Under these conditions deciding if K

is acyclic is a simple (linear-time) task and we refer to (Harviainen et al., 2026) for the technical details. Essentially, we can run a DFS starting at u such that when arriving at an unvisited vertex 

z with a vertex-side zγ , the DFS prioritizes expanding to vertices in N ˆγG(z) and only then considers those in N γG(z). Moreover, whenever an edge {xα, yα } is scanned, for some α ∈ { +, −} , if y is unvisited then we can “flip” y in order to make this edge have vertex-sides of opposite signs, i.e., this bidirected edge becomes essentially a directed edge, and if y is already visited then it is possible to find a cycloid 9 in the current graph induced by the edges which have been scanned so far; if the DFS halts without ever finding such an edge then it produces a bidirected graph where every edge has vertex-sides of opposite signs, i.e., a directed graph, in which case a standard DFS suffices to 

> 9In fact, a cycloid with the “exceptional” vertex.

41 finally decide if K is acyclic. The correctness of “flipping” the vertex-sides of the vertices during the first DFS is ensured by the next result (Proposition 16), i.e., flipping vertices during the first DFS preserves cycloids. 

Proposition 16. Let G be a bidirected graph, let u ∈ V (G) be a vertex, and let G′ be the graph obtained from G by changing the positive vertex-sides at u into negative vertex-sides and the negative into positive (i.e., flipping u). Let W be a sequence of edges of G. Then W is a bidirected walk in 

G if and only if W is a bidirected walk in G′.

As for the reachability states, if u is a tip with sign γ and v is a tip with sign δ in K, then clearly Reaches uv γδ is True and the remaining three reachability states are False . The fact that at most one state is true is clear from Proposition 14 (since otherwise there is a cycle and by definition these states are Null and we are done). To see why indeed there is one state set to true, consider a maximal bidirected path in K and observe that this path starts at uγ and ends at vδ (similarly as to why a maximal path in an acyclic graph with unique source and unique sink starts at the source and ends at the sink). As usual, this path in K can be mapped to a path in X.

Phase 2. This phase is also a BFS starting at the root of the tree and is essentially identical to phase two of superbubbles. The only difference is in the computation of the acyclicity states, which we describe next. Let K := skeleton *(ν), let μ1, . . . , μ k denote the children of ν, and let μ0 denote the parent of ν (if ν is the root of T then μ0 can be ignored). Recall that at this point the acyclicity and absence-of-extremities states leaving ν to μi for 

i ∈ { 0, . . . , k } are all set to True , otherwise the states State μi,ν [Acyclic ] for i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } are updated in the obvious way (see how to update the states in this case in the description of phase two for superbubbles). So we are indeed in conditions of building K. Similarly as for superbubbles, if K is acyclic then State μi,ν [Acyclic ] is True for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } (to decide if K is acyclic we can proceed identically as described above in phase one). Otherwise K has a cycloid and in order to maintain our algorithm linear-time we can compute its feedback edges. 10 Depending on which edges are indeed feedback edges we can update the acyclicity states accordingly, like we did for superbubbles. One key observation about K is that it contains no tips. Suppose otherwise. If K has a tip x but x is not a tip in expansion( e) for some edge e ∈ E(skeleton( ν)) then expansion( e) has vertex-sides of opposite signs at x and therefore expansion( e) has at most one tip, which is the other endpoint of e. But then Proposition 15 gives a cycloid in expansion( e), a contradiction since every acyclicity state pointing away from ν is to True . So indeed x is a tip for some absence-of-extremity state pointing towards ν, and thus that state is False , a contradiction. In conclusion, it is enough to devise a linear-time algorithm for finding feedback edges in tipless bidirected graphs. Such an algorithm is presented in Section 6.3 and it is followed by a hardness result for the same problem in general bidirected graphs. 

Phase 3. This phase is completely analogous to phase three of the superbubble finding algorithm. The only change required to the algorithm is to remove the condition of the “back-edge”, i.e., in a candidate superbubble st we must ensure that ts is not an edge, while for ultrabubbles the existence of that edge is allowed: clearly, for a separable pair of vertex-sides {uα, vβ } in a graph G,if {uˆα, v ˆβ} ∈ E(G) then splitting uα and vβ results in a graph where the component containing u

and v does not contain the edge {u′ ˆα, v ′ ˆβ}. The remaining parts of the algorithm are completely identical and thus we obtain the next theorem. We remark that part as to why it is straightforward to get the ultrabubble algorithm from the superbubble algorithm has to do with the fact that 

> 10 For clarity, a feedback edge in a bidirected graph is an edge intersecting every cycloid of the graph.

42 ultrabubbles are, essentially, “weak” superbubbles (see (Harviainen et al., 2026) for further results and intuition on this direction). 

Theorem 11. The ultrabubbles of a bidirected graph G can be computed in time O(|V (G)|+|E(G)|).

6.3 Feedback edges in bidirected graphs 

Feedback edges in tipless bidirected graphs We present a linear-time algorithm computing every feedback edge of a bidirected graph G containing no tips. Recall that a feedback edge in a bidirected graph is an edge contained in every cycloid of the graph. The algorithm constructs G by ear additions. If it succeeds then the problem reduces to that of a directed graph, where known linear-time algorithms to find feedback edges can be used. Otherwise the procedure finds an obstruction and can correctly output that G has no feedback edges. We begin with a simple observation. 

Lemma 13. Let G be a bidirected graph without tips. If G has a cycloid with exceptional vertex then G has no feedback edges. Proof. Let B be a cycloid in G with exceptional vertex x having sign α ∈ { +, −} . Since G has no tips, there is an edge {xˆα, uγ } ∈ E(G) and let p be a bidirected path consisting of that edge alone. Also because G has no tips, we can greedily extend this bidirected path from u. During the process either we visit a vertex already in p, in which case we have found a cycloid edge-disjoint from B and thus G has no feedback edges, or we hit a vertex of B for which we give the following argument. Notice that p partitions B into two subpaths. Moreover, notice that removing an edge of B from either of these subpaths leaves G with a cycloid via {xˆα, uγ } and the untouched path (notice that this cycloid possibly has an exceptional vertex), but since any feedback edge is contained in B we can conclude that G has no feedback edges. We need two more definitions before describing the algorithm. Let H ⊂ G be a nonempty graph. Say that an ear is a path of G whose first and last vertex (called attachment vertices) are distinct and belong to H and every other vertex on the path does not belong to H. Say that H is 

digraphic if every edge of G has opposite signs in its vertex-sides. Begin by applying Proposition 15 to get a cycloid C. We can assume to be provided a cycloid without exception, for otherwise G has no feedback edge by Lemma 13. We maintain the invariant that the graph is digraphic and is strongly connected (in the directed sense). Put H0 = C. Graph H0 is digraphic (i.e., every edge has vertex-sides of opposite signs). To ensure it is strongly connected, it is not hard to see that it suffices for that effect to invert some of its vertices (which is correct due to Proposition 16). So H0 respects the invariant. We show that if Hi respects the invariant then successfully adding an ear results in a graph Hi+1 also respecting the invariant, and if not, then we either found a cycloid with exception or an edge-disjoint cycle from C. When no more ears can be added then we have recovered a graph equivalent to G in the sense of Proposition 16. We remark that we only resign vertices of the newly added ears except for its attachment vertices as those are already in the current graph Hi.Suppose that V (Hi) ⊂ V (G) and let x ∈ V (G) \ V (Hi). Since G is tipless, vertex x is not a tip. Then build a path p+ starting with a vertex-side x+ until it hits a vertex of Hi or a vertex previously on the path. In the latter case we halt, because we have found a cycloid disjoint from C.So this path hits Hi first in a vertex a. Similarly, build a path p− starting with a vertex-side x−

until it hits either a vertex in V (Hi), a vertex of p+, or a vertex of p−. If one of the last two cases occurs then we have found cycloid disjoint from C. So p− hits Hi first in a vertex b. If b = a then we have found a cycloid disjoint from C, so b̸ = a. Notice that the concatenation of p+ and p− gives 43 an ear with attachment vertices a and b. Let α, β ∈ { +, −} denote the signs of the vertex-sides of the ear in the attachment vertices. Suppose that α = β. The graph Hi has an α- ˆβ path 11 since it is strongly connected. This path together with the new ear creates a cycloid with exceptional vertex 

a in Hi+1 , and so we can halt due to Lemma 13. Otherwise α̸ = β. It is trivial to flip each vertex of the ear 12 so that the every edge has vertex-sides of opposite signs, which makes Hi+1 digraphic. We are left to argue that Hi+1 is strongly connected. Assume without loss of generality that 

α = + . Notice that Hi has +− and −+ paths for any two vertices since it is strongly connected. Let u be a vertex contained in the ear distinct from a and b and let v ∈ V (Hi) (clearly, any two vertices in the ear are strongly connected in Hi+1 ). We show that Hi+1 has u+-v− and v+-u−

paths, thus showing that Hi+1 is strongly connected. Since a ∈ V (Hi), Hi has a v+-a− path, which prepended with the a+-u− subpath of the ear gives a v+-u− path in Hi+1 . (Notice that the a+-u− exists by construction of ear). Similarly, since b ∈ V (Hi), Hi has a b+-v− path, which prepended with the u+-b− subpath of the ear gives a u+-v− path in Hi+1 .Suppose now that V (Hi) = V (G) and E(Hi) ⊂ E(G). Let e ∈ E(G) \ E(H). If the vertex-sides of e have the same sign then we have found a cycloid with exception (similarly to the case where the ear had vertex-sides of the same sign in the attachment vertices, i.e., when α = β). Otherwise Hi+1 

is digraphic since Hi is digraphic, e has vertex-sides of opposite signs, and Hi+1 = Hi + e. Further, 

Hi+1 is strongly connected because Hi is strongly connected and V (Hi+1 ) = V (Hi). Finally we have Hi+1 = G. Due to the invariant, G is digraphic and is strongly connected. In conclusion, if the ear addition procedure succeeds then we know that G is essentially a strongly connected directed graph, where linear-time algorithms to find feedback edges are known. If it fails then we know that the graph has no feedback edges. We are left to examine the running time of the ear-addition construction. 

Theorem 12. There is an algorithm that finds all the feedback edges of a tipless bidirected graph in time O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|).Proof. We argue that the ear addition procedure takes O(|V (G)| + |E(G)|) time. Finding H0 and the ears takes linear time: we can greedily extend the walk (e.g., by always taking an arbitrary edge incident to the current vertex being extended) until we hit a relevant vertex for the construction. Flipping the vertices of the ears takes linear time in the size of the ear, and since every vertex is flipped at most once and the ears partition E(G), the overall time taken to flip the vertices during the construction is Θ( |V (G)| + |E(G)|). The checks on the vertex-sides at the attachment vertices when adding ears take constant time. 

Hardness of computing feedback edges Recall the Triangle problem where one is given an undirected graph G′ = ( V ′, E ′) and asked whether it contains a cycle of length 3, that is, a triangle. The k-Clique Conjecture (see Conjecture 10 of Künnemann and Redzic (2024)) asserts in particular that a triangle cannot be found in time O(nω−ϵ) for matrix multiplication exponent ω and any ϵ > 0. We argue that under the k-Clique Conjecture , one cannot decide whether a bidirected graph has bidirected feedback edge , i.e., whether it can be made acyclic by removing a single edge in time O(nω−ϵ) for any ϵ > 0.

Theorem 13. Under the k-Clique Conjecture , the existence of a bidirected feedback edge cannot be decided in time O(nω−ϵ) for any ϵ > 0.               

> 11 Hialso has a ˆα-βpath, and thus Hi+1 also has a cycloid with exceptional vertex b.
> 12 Without loss of generality suppose that α= + . We can start at a+and move to the consecutive vertex in the
> a+-b−path while greedily flipping vertices in order to make every edge directed. Essentially, the first edge has a plus and a minus, the second too, and so on and so forth, until we reach the last vertex, which must band moreover is contained in the vertex-side b−.

44 Proof. Take an arbitrary instance GT = ( VT , E T ) of Triangle . By a standard color-coding-like reduction, we can reduce Triangle to the Tripartite Triangle problem (Fellows et al., 2009) where we look for a triangle in an undirected tripartite graph G3 = ( A, B, C, E 3) with tripartite sets 

A, B, and C such that both endpoints of all edges in E3 come from distinct sets. The reduction multiplies the number of vertices by 3 and the number of edges by 6, so solving Tripartite Triangle is as hard as hard solving Triangle .We will next show a reduction from Tripartite Triangle to finding a bidirected feedback edge in a bidirected graph G = ( V, E ). Let G3 = ( A, B, C, E 3) be an instance of Tripartite Triangle . Construct a bidirected graph on the vertex set A ∪ B ∪ C ∪ { x, y, z } with auxiliary vertices x, y, and z. For every edge {u, v } ∈ E3,(1) if u ∈ A and v ∈ B, add the edge {u−, v +};(2) if u ∈ A and v ∈ C, add the edge {u+, v −} ; and (3) if u ∈ B and v ∈ C, add the edge {u−, v −} .Finally, add bidirected edges {x+, y −} , {y+, z −} , and {z+, x −} . We claim that G has a bidirected feedback edge if and only if G3 does not have a triangle. Suppose G3 has a triangle {a, b, c } with a ∈ A, b ∈ B, and c ∈ C. Then, there are two disjoint cycles with the edges {x+, y −} , {y+, z −} , {z+, x −} and {a−, b +}, {b−, c −} , {c−, a +} in G, and no bidirected feedback edge can exist. Suppose now instead that no triangle exists in G3. We need to show that there are no other cycles in G than the one with the edges {x+, y −} , {y+, z −} , {z+, x −} . Consider any alternating closed walk W in G with edges {v1α1, v 2 ˆα2}, {v2α2, v 3 ˆα3}, . . . , {vℓαℓ, v 1α′

> 1

} with v1, v 2, . . . , v ℓ ∈ A ∪ B ∪ C

and α1, α 2, . . . , α ℓ, α ′ 

> 1

∈ { +, −} . Note that v2, v 3, . . . , v ℓ̸ ∈ C, since for all v ∈ C all vertex-sides are of the form v−. Because of the construction, it also cannot be that vi, v i+2 mod ℓ ∈ X and 

vi+1 mod ℓ ∈ Y for any i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ } with X, Y ∈ { A, B, C }.Therefore, we must have that ℓ = 3 , v1 ∈ C, and either v2 ∈ A, v3 ∈ B or v2 ∈ B, v3 ∈ A. In this case, we have a tripartite triangle {v1, v 2, v 3}, resulting in a contradiction. Hence, G cannot contain any other cycles and thus, for example, {x+, y −} is a bidirected feedback edge. By omitting the edges {x+, y −} , {y+, z −} , and {z+, x −} from G, we immediately get the following corollary. 

Corollary 2. Under the k-Clique Conjecture , the acyclicity of a bidirected graph cannot be decided in time O(nω−ϵ) for any ϵ > 0.

# Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to Benedict Paten for very helpful explanations and clarifications on snarls. Co-funded by the European Union (ERC, SCALEBIO, 101169716). Views and opinions ex-pressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. Co-funded by the Research Council of Finland, Grant 1358744. Juha Harviainen was supported by the Research Council of Finland, Grant 351156. 

45 References 

Kazutoshi Ando, Satoru Fujishige, and Toshio Nemoto. Decomposition of a bidirected graph into strongly connected components and its signed poset structure. Discrete Applied Mathematics , 68 (3):237–248, 1996. Ouahiba Bessouf, Abdelkader Khelladi, and Thomas Zaslavsky. Transitive closure and transitive reduction in bidirected graphs. Czechoslovak Mathematical Journal , 69(2):295–315, 2019. Shreeharsha G Bhat, Daanish Mahajan, and Chirag Jain. Billi: Provably accurate and scalable bubble detection in pangenome graphs. bioRxiv , 2025. URL https://doi.org/10.1101/2025. 11.21.689636 .Daniel Bienstock and Clyde L. Monma. On the complexity of covering vertices by faces in a planar graph. SIAM Journal on Computing , 17(1):53–76, 1988. doi: 10.1137/0217004. Ljiljana Brankovic, Costas S Iliopoulos, Ritu Kundu, Manal Mohamed, Solon P Pissis, and Fa-tima Vayani. Linear-time superbubble identification algorithm for genome assembly. Theoretical Computer Science , 609:374–383, 2016. Xian Chang, Jordan Eizenga, Adam M Novak, Jouni Sirén, and Benedict Paten. Distance indexing and seed clustering in sequence graphs. Bioinformatics , 36(Supplement_1):i146–i153, 2020. Fawaz Dabbaghie, Jana Ebler, and Tobias Marschall. Bubblegun: enumerating bubbles and su-perbubbles in genome graphs. Bioinformatics , 38(17):4217–4219, 07 2022. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac448. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac448 .H.B. de Macedo Filho, C.M.H. de Figueiredo, Z. Li, and R.C.S. Machado. Using spqr-trees to speed up recognition algorithms based on 2-cutsets. Discrete Applied Mathematics , 245:101– 108, 2018. ISSN 0166-218X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dam.2017.01.009. URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166218X17300422 . LAGOS’15 — Eighth Latin-American Algorithms, Graphs, and Optimization Symposium, Fortaleza, Brazil — 2015. Giuseppe Di Battista and Roberto Tamassia. On-line graph algorithms with SPQR-trees. In Michael S. Paterson, editor, Automata, Languages and Programming , pages 598–611, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1990a. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-47159-2. Giuseppe Di Battista and Roberto Tamassia. On-line graph algorithms with spqr-trees. In Michael S. Paterson, editor, Automata, Languages and Programming , pages 598–611, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1990b. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-47159-2. Giuseppe Di Battista and Roberto Tamassia. On-line planarity testing. SIAM Journal on Com-puting , 25(5):956–997, 1996a. doi: 10.1137/S0097539794280736. Giuseppe Di Battista and Roberto Tamassia. On-line maintenance of triconnected components with spqr-trees. Algorithmica , 15(4):302–318, 1996b. Reinhard Diestel. Graph theory , volume 173. Springer Nature, 2025. Guy Even, Joseph Naor, Baruch Schieber, and Madhu Sudan. Approximating minimum feedback sets and multicuts in directed graphs. Algorithmica , 20(2):151–174, 1998. 46 Marcus Fedarko. Metagenomescope. https://github.com/fedarko/MetagenomeScope , 2017. Ac-cessed on Nov 1, 2025. Michael R. Fellows, Danny Hermelin, Frances A. Rosamond, and Stéphane Vialette. On the pa-rameterized complexity of multiple-interval graph problems. Theor. Comput. Sci. , 410(1):53–61, 2009. doi: 10.1016/J.TCS.2008.09.065. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2008.09.065 .Harold N Gabow. An efficient reduction technique for degree-constrained subgraph and bidirected network flow problems. In Proc. 15th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 448–456, 1983. Michael R Garey and Robert E Tarjan. A linear-time algorithm for finding all feedback vertices. 

Information Processing Letters , 7(6):274–276, 1978. Shilpa Garg, Mikko Rautiainen, Adam M Novak, Erik Garrison, Richard Durbin, and Tobias Marschall. A graph-based approach to diploid genome assembly. Bioinformatics , 34(13):i105– i114, 2018. Erik Garrison, Jouni Sirén, Adam M Novak, Glenn Hickey, Jordan M Eizenga, Eric T Dawson, William Jones, Shilpa Garg, Charles Markello, Michael F Lin, et al. Variation graph toolkit improves read mapping by representing genetic variation in the reference. Nature biotechnology ,36(9):875–879, 2018. Fabian Gärtner and Peter F Stadler. Direct superbubble detection. Algorithms , 12(4):81, 2019. Fabian Gärtner, Lydia Müller, and Peter F Stadler. Superbubbles revisited. Algorithms for Molec-ular Biology , 13(1):16, 2018. Ebrahim Ghorbani, Jana Katharina Nickel, and Florian Reich. A generalisation of menger’s theorem in bidirected graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12283 , 2025. Carsten Gutwenger and Petra Mutzel. A linear time implementation of SPQR-trees. In Joe Marks, editor, Graph Drawing , pages 77–90, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-44541-8. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44541-2_8. Carsten Gutwenger, Petra Mutzel, and René Weiskircher. Inserting an edge into a planar graph. 

Algorithmica , 41(4):289–308, 2005. Juha Harviainen, Francisco Sena, Corentin Moumard, Aleksandr Politov, Sebastian Schmidt, and Alexandru I Tomescu. Scalable computation of ultrabubbles in pangenomes by orienting bidi-rected graphs. bioRxiv , 2026. doi: 10.64898/2026.03.28.714704. URL http://biorxiv.org/ content/early/2026/03/31/2026.03.28.714704/ .Glenn Hickey, Jean Monlong, Jana Ebler, Adam M Novak, Jordan M Eizenga, Yan Gao, Tobias Marschall, Heng Li, and Benedict Paten. Pangenome graph construction from genome alignments with minigraph-cactus. Nature biotechnology , 42(4):663–673, 2024. Jacob Holm, Giuseppe F. Italiano, Adam Karczmarz, Jakub Lacki, and Eva Rotenberg. Decre-mental SPQR-trees for Planar Graphs. In Yossi Azar, Hannah Bast, and Grzegorz Her-man, editors, 26th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2018) , volume 112 of 

Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 46:1–46:16, Dagstuhl, Ger-many, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. ISBN 978-3-95977-081-1. 47 doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2018.46. URL https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/ 10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2018.46 .J. E. Hopcroft and R. E. Tarjan. Dividing a graph into triconnected components. SIAM Journal on Computing , 2(3):135–158, 1973a. doi: 10.1137/0202012. John E. Hopcroft and Robert Endre Tarjan. Efficient algorithms for graph manipulation [H] (al-gorithm 447). Commun. ACM , 16(6):372–378, 1973b. Nafiseh Jafarzadeh, Jordan M Eizenga, and Benedict Paten. An efficient graph algorithm for diploid local ancestry inference. bioRxiv , 2025. doi: 10.1101/2025.07.05.662656. URL https: //www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2025/07/09/2025.07.05.662656 .Nanao Kita. Bidirected graphs i: Signed general kotzig-lov \’asz decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.07414 , 2017. Mikhail Kolmogorov, Derek M Bickhart, Bahar Behsaz, Alexey Gurevich, Mikhail Rayko, Sung Bong Shin, Kristen Kuhn, Jeffrey Yuan, Evgeny Polevikov, Timothy PL Smith, et al. metaflye: scalable long-read metagenome assembly using repeat graphs. Nature methods , 17(11): 1103–1110, 2020. Marvin Künnemann and Mirza Redzic. Fine-grained complexity of multiple domination and dominating patterns in sparse graphs. In Édouard Bonnet and Pawel Rzazewski, editors, 

19th International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation, IPEC 2024, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, United Kingdom, September 4-6, 2024 , volume 321 of LIPIcs , pages 9:1–9:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.IPEC.2024.9. URL https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.IPEC.2024.9 .Saunders Mac Lane. A structural characterization of planar combinatorial graphs. Duke Math-ematical Journal , 3(3):460 – 472, 1937. doi: 10.1215/S0012-7094-37-00336-3. URL https: //doi.org/10.1215/S0012-7094-37-00336-3 .Heng Li, Maximillian Marin, and Maha R Farhat. Exploring gene content with pangene graphs. 

Bioinformatics , 40(7):btae456, 2024. Wen-Wei Liao et al. A draft human pangenome reference. Nature , 617(7960):312–324, 2023. Silviu Maniu, Reynold Cheng, and Pierre Senellart. An indexing framework for queries on proba-bilistic graphs. ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS) , 42(2):1–34, 2017. Paul Medvedev, Konstantinos Georgiou, Gene Myers, and Michael Brudno. Computability of models for sequence assembly. In International workshop on algorithms in bioinformatics , pages 289–301. Springer, 2007. Karl Menger. Zur allgemeinen kurventheorie. Fundamenta Mathematicae , 10(1):96–115, 1927. Ilia Minkin and Paul Medvedev. Scalable multiple whole-genome alignment and locally collinear block construction with sibeliaz. Nature communications , 11(1):6327, 2020. Petra Mutzel. The spqr-tree data structure in graph drawing. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming , pages 34–46. Springer, 2003. Njagi Mwaniki, Erik Garrison, and Nadia Pisanti. Popping bubbles in pangenome graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20932 , 2024. 48 Taku Onodera, Kunihiko Sadakane, and Tetsuo Shibuya. Detecting superbubbles in assembly graphs. In Algorithms in Bioinformatics: 13th International Workshop, WABI 2013, Sophia Antipolis, France, September 2-4, 2013. Proceedings 13 , pages 338–348. Springer, 2013. Benedict Paten, Mark Diekhans, Dent Earl, John St John, Jian Ma, Bernard Suh, and David Haussler. Cactus graphs for genome comparisons. Journal of Computational Biology , 18(3): 469–481, 2011. Benedict Paten, Jordan M. Eizenga, Yohei M. Rosen, Adam M. Novak, Erik Garrison, and Glenn Hickey. Superbubbles, ultrabubbles, and cacti. Journal of Computational Biology , 25(7):649–663, 2018. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2017.0251. PMID: 29461862. Amatur Rahman and Paul Medvedev. Assembler artifacts include misassembly because of unsafe unitigs and underassembly because of bidirected graphs. Genome Research , 32(9):1746–1753, 2022a. Amatur Rahman and Paul Medvedev. Uncovering hidden assembly artifacts: when unitigs are not safe and bidirected graphs are not helpful. In International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology , pages 377–379. Springer, 2022b. Mikko Rautiainen, Sergey Nurk, Brian P Walenz, Glennis A Logsdon, David Porubsky, Arang Rhie, Evan E Eichler, Adam M Phillippy, and Sergey Koren. Telomere-to-telomere assembly of diploid chromosomes with verkko. Nature biotechnology , 41(10):1474–1482, 2023. Alexander Schrijver et al. Combinatorial optimization: polyhedra and efficiency , volume 24. Springer, 2003. Kishwar Shafin, Trevor Pesout, Ryan Lorig-Roach, Marina Haukness, Hugh E Olsen, Colleen Bosworth, Joel Armstrong, Kristof Tigyi, Nicholas Maurer, Sergey Koren, et al. Nanopore sequencing and the shasta toolkit enable efficient de novo assembly of eleven human genomes. 

Nature biotechnology , 38(9):1044–1053, 2020. Jouni Sirén, Jean Monlong, Xian Chang, Adam M Novak, Jordan M Eizenga, Charles Markello, Jonas A Sibbesen, Glenn Hickey, Pi-Chuan Chang, Andrew Carroll, et al. Pangenomics enables genotyping of known structural variants in 5202 diverse genomes. Science , 374(6574):abg8871, 2021. Jouni Sirén, Parsa Eskandar, Matteo Tommaso Ungaro, Glenn Hickey, Jordan M Eizenga, Adam M Novak, Xian Chang, Pi-Chuan Chang, Mikhail Kolmogorov, Andrew Carroll, et al. Personalized pangenome references. Nature Methods , 21(11):2017–2023, 2024. Wing-Kin Sung, Kunihiko Sadakane, Tetsuo Shibuya, Abha Belorkar, and Iana Pyrogova. An 

o(m log m)-time algorithm for detecting superbubbles. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computa-tional Biology and Bioinformatics , 12(4):770–777, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TCBB.2014.2385696. Songbo Wang, Tun Xu, Pengyu Zhang, and Kai Ye. Population-level structural variant character-ization from pangenome graph. bioRxiv , pages 2025–07, 2025. Athanasios E. Zisis and Pål Sætrom. Ultrabubble enumeration via a lowest common ancestor approach, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.03909 .49 Algorithm 1: Superbubble finding – Phase 1 

Input: Directed graph G, SPQR tree T having at least two nodes  

> 1

Function ProcessEdge( ν, μ ):

// ν is the parent of μ 

> 2

for μi ∈ children T (μ) do  

> 3

ProcessEdge( μ, μ i); 

> 4

if ν = null then  

> 5

return ; 

> 6

{s, t } ← eμ (where eμ ∈ skeleton( ν));  

> 7

noExtr ← false iff V (skeleton( μ)) \ { s, t } has an extremity of G; 

> 8

Let e1, . . . , e k denote the virtual edges of μ with pertaining nodes μ1, . . . , μ k (k ≥ 0) ; 

> 9

ThereIsNoExtremityBelow ← ∧ki=1 State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ]; 

> 10

ThereIsNoCycleBelow ← ∧ki=1 State μ,μ i [Acyclic ]; 

> 11

State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] ← noExtr ∧ ThereIsNoExtremityBelow ; 

> 12

if State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] is False then  

> 13

State ν,μ [Acyclic ] ← Null ; 

> 14

else  

> 15

if ¬ ThereIsNoCycleBelow then  

> 16

State ν,μ [Acyclic ] ← False ; 

> 17

else 

// We are in conditions to build skeleton *(μ) − st − ts  

> 18

K ← skeleton *(μ) − st − ts ; 

> 19

State ν,μ [Acyclic ] ← True iff K is acyclic; 

// Run DFS or BFS on K 

> 20

if State ν,μ [Acyclic ] is True then  

> 21

if N + 

> K

(s) ∩ V (K)̸ = ∅ then 

// See Lemma 6  

> 22

State ν,μ [Reaches st ] ← True ; State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] ← False ; 

> 23

else  

> 24

State ν,μ [Reaches st ] ← False ; State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] ← True ; 

> 25

else  

> 26

State ν,μ [Reaches st ] ← Null ; State ν,μ [Reaches ts ] ← Null ; 

> 27

ρ ← the root of T ; 

> 28

ProcessEdge( null , ρ );

50 Algorithm 2: Superbubble finding – Phase 2 

Input: Directed graph G, SPQR tree T having at least two nodes  

> 1

ρ ← root of T , Q ← queue () , Q.push (ρ); 

> 2

while Q is not empty do  

> 3

ν ← Q.pop () ; 

> 4

if ν has no children in T then continue ; 

> 5

Let μ1, . . . , μ k be the children of ν with pertaining virtual edges {si, t i} = ei ∈ E(skeleton( ν)) , and μ0

the parent of ν with pertaining virtual edge e0 ∈ E(skeleton( ν)) ;

// μ0 can be ignored if ν = ρ 

> 6

Q.push (μi) ∀i ∈ [1 , k ]; 

> 7

AllNodeExtremities ← a set containing all the extremities of G in V (skeleton( ν)) ; 

> 8

AllEdgeExtremities ← a set containing all the virtual edges ei ∈ E(skeleton( ν)) such that 

State ν,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] is False ; 

> 9

for i ∈ [1 , k ] do  

> 10

noExtr ← True iff AllNodeExtremities \{ si, t i} = ∅;

// Notice that it suffices to store (up to) three extremities of V (skeleton( μ)) in order to update noExtr in constant time  

> 11

State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ] ← (AllEdgeExtremities \{{ si, t i}} = ∅) ∧ noExtr ;

// Similarly, it suffices to store (up to) two virtual edges of skeleton( ν) with corresponding extremity states leaving ν set to False  

> 12

if State μi,ν [NoInnerExtr ] is False then  

> 13

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← Null ; 

> 14

if at least two states among {State ν,μ 1 [Acyclic ], . . . , State ν,μ k [Acyclic ]} evaluate to Null then  

> 15

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← Null ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }; 

> 16

if exactly one state among {State ν,μ 1 [Acyclic ], . . . , State ν,μ k [Acyclic ]} evaluates to Null then  

> 17

Let j ∈ { 1, . . . , k } be such that State ν,μ j [Acyclic ] = Null ; 

> 18

Y ← { 1, . . . , k } \ { j}; 

> 19

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← Null , ∀i ∈ Y ; 

> 20

AcyclicOutside ← true iff ∧  

> i∈Y∪{ 0}

State ν,μ i [Acyclic ] is True ; 

> 21

if ¬ AcyclicOutside then State μj,ν [Acyclic ] ← False ; 

> 22

else 

// We are in conditions to build skeleton *(ν) − sj tj − tj sj 

> 23

K ← skeleton *(ν) − sj tj − tj sj ; 

> 24

State μj,ν [Acyclic ] ← True iff K is acyclic;  

> 25

if no state among {State ν,μ 1 [Acyclic ], . . . , State ν,μ k [Acyclic ]} evaluate to Null then  

> 26

if at least two states among {State ν,μ 1 [Acyclic ], . . . , State ν,μ k [Acyclic ]} evaluate to False then  

> 27

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← False ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }; 

> 28

if exactly one state among {State ν,μ 1 [Acyclic ], . . . , State ν,μ k [Acyclic ]} evaluates to False then  

> 29

Let j ∈ { 1, . . . , k } be such that State ν,μ j [Acyclic ] = False ; 

> 30

Y ← { 1, . . . , k } \ { j}; 

> 31

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← False , ∀i ∈ Y ;

// We are in conditions to build skeleton *(ν) − sj tj − tj sj 

> 32

K ← skeleton *(ν) − sj tj − tj sj ; 

> 33

State μj,ν [Acyclic ] ← True iff K is acyclic;  

> 34

if every state among {State ν,μ 1 [Acyclic ], . . . , State ν,μ k [Acyclic ]} evaluates to True then 

// We are in conditions to build skeleton *(μ) 

> 35

A ← FeedbackArcs (skeleton *(ν)) ∩ { e1, . . . , e k };

// A contains those virtual edges of skeleton *(ν) which are feedback arcs in 

skeleton *(ν) 

> 36

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← True ∀ei ∈ A; 

> 37

State μi,ν [Acyclic ] ← False ∀ei /∈ A;

51 Algorithm 3: Superbubble finding – Phase 3 

Input: Directed graph G, SPQR tree T having at least two nodes  

> 1

for every P-node μ of T do  

> 2

Build the sets E+ 

> s

, E − 

> t

of μ as described in Proposition 3;  

> 3

Build the sets E− 

> s

, E + 

> t

analogously;  

> 4

if E+ 

> s

= E− 

> t

then 

// Equivalently, E− 

> s

= E+ 

> t
> 5

Let {s, t } be the vertex set of skeleton( μ); 

> 6

Let e1, . . . , e k denote the edges in skeleton( μ) ( k ≥ 3) ; 

> 7

Let μ1, . . . , μ ℓ denote the pertaining nodes of edges in E+ 

> s

(ℓ ≥ 0) ; 

> 8

Let μ′

> 1

, . . . , μ ′ 

> ℓ′

denote the pertaining nodes of edges in E− 

> s

(ℓ′ ≥ 0) ; 

> 9

assert (ℓ′ = k − ℓ); 

> 10

if State μ,μ i [Acyclic ] and State μ,μ i [NoInnerExtr ] are True for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ } then  

> 11

if N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (⋃ 

> e∈E+
> s

expansion( e)) and ts / ∈ E(G) then  

> 12

if ℓ = 1 then 

// See Proposition 2  

> 13

Report (s, t ) if the pertaining node of the edge in E+ 

> s

is not an S-node;  

> 14

else  

> 15

Report (s, t ); 

> 16

if State μ,μ ′ 

> i

[Acyclic ] and State μ,μ ′ 

> i

[NoInnerExtr ] are True for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ ′} then  

> 17

if N − 

> G

(s), N + 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (⋃ 

> e∈E−
> s

expansion( e)) and st / ∈ E(G) then  

> 18

if ℓ′ = 1 then 

// See Proposition 2  

> 19

Report (t, s ) if the pertaining node of the edge in E− 

> s

is not an S-node;  

> 20

else  

> 21

Report (t, s ); 

> 22

for every R-node μ of T do  

> 23

for every neighbour ν of μ in T that is not a P-node do  

> 24

Let {s, t } = eμ ∈ skeleton( ν) be the virtual edge pertaining to μ; 

> 25

Let X = expansion( eμ); 

> 26

if State ν,μ [Acyclic ] and State ν,μ [NoInnerExtr ] are True then  

> 27

if N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (X) and ts / ∈ E(G) then 

// And hence N − 

> G

(s), N + 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (X) 

> 28

Report (s, t ); 

> 29

if N + 

> G

(t), N − 

> G

(s) ⊆ V (X) and st / ∈ E(G) then 

// And hence N − 

> G

(t), N + 

> G

(s) ⊆ V (X) 

> 30

Report (t, s );

52 Algorithm 4: Superbubble finding algorithm 

Input: Directed graph G 

> 1

Let B and C ⊆ V (G) be the list of blocks and cutvertices of U (G), respectively (k ≥ 1) ; 

> 2

for H ∈ B do  

> 3

for e = {s, t } ∈ E(H) do  

> 4

if N + 

> s

(G) = {t} and N − 

> t

(G) = {s} and ts / ∈ E(G) then  

> 5

Report (s, t ); 

> 6

if N + 

> t

(G) = {s} and N − 

> s

(G) = {t} and st / ∈ E(G) then  

> 7

Report (t, s ); 

> 8

if H is a multi-bridge then  

> 9

continue  

> 10

else 

// H is 2-connected  

> 11

if H has exactly one source s and one sink t w.r.t. H and ts / ∈ E(G) then  

> 12

if C ∩ V (H) \ { s, t } = ∅ and N + 

> G

(s), N − 

> G

(t) ⊆ V (H) and H is acyclic then  

> 13

Report (s, t ); 

> 14

T ← BuildSPQR (H); 

> 15

Phase1 (G, T ); 

> 16

Phase2 (G, T ); 

> 17

Phase3 (G, T );

Algorithm 5: FindSnarlsInSnodes (F, H, T )

Input: Sign-cut graph F of a bidirected graph, maximal 2-connected subgraph H of G, SPQR tree 

T of H 

> 1

for each S-node μ of T do  

> 2

v0, . . . , v k−1 ← ordered sequence of the vertices of skeleton( μ); 

> 3

e0, . . . , e k−1 ← ordered sequence of the edges of skeleton( μ) such that vi is an endpoint of 

e(( i+1) mod k) and ei; 

> 4

W ← [ ] ; 

> 5

for i ∈ [0 , k − 1] do  

> 6

if vi is a tip in F or HasDangling (F, H, v i) then  

> 7

continue ; 

> 8

L, R ← expansion( ei), expansion( e(i+1 mod k)); 

> 9

if (N + 

> H

(vi) ⊆ V (L) or N + 

> H

(vi) ⊆ V (R)) and (N − 

> H

(vi) ⊆ V (L) or N − 

> H

(vi) ⊆ V (R)) then 

// vi is good  

> 10

α ← + if (N + 

> H

(vi) ⊆ V (R)) else −; 

> 11

W. append (vi ˆα); 

> 12

W. append (viα); 

> 13

Report the pairs formed by the vertex-sides in W in consecutive positions starting from the second element, and lastly pair the last vertex-side with the first vertex-side of W ;

53 Algorithm 6: FindSnarlsInPnodes (F, H, T )

Input: Sign-cut graph F of a bidirected graph, maximal 2-connected subgraph H of G, SPQR tree 

T of H 

> 1

for each P-node μ of T do  

> 2

u, v ← the vertices of skeleton( μ); 

> 3

e1, . . . , e k ← the edges of skeleton( μ); 

> 4

X1, . . . , X k ← expansion( e1), . . . , expansion( ek) ( k ≥ 3) ; 

> 5

if HasDangling (F, H, u ) or HasDangling (F, H, v ) or u is a tip in F or v is a tip in F then  

> 6

continue ; 

> 7

Build the sets E+ 

> u

, E − 

> u

, E + 

> v

, E − 

> v

as described in Proposition 10; 

// Since u and v are non-tips in F and have no dangling blocks with respect to 

H, all of the above are non-empty  

> 8

for α, β ∈ { +, −} do  

> 9

if Eαu̸ = ∅, Eαu ∩ E ˆαu = ∅, Eβv ∩ E ˆβv = ∅, Eαu = Eβv then 

// Equivalently, E ˆαu̸ = ∅, Eαu ∩ E ˆαu = ∅, Eβv ∩ E ˆβv = ∅, E ˆαu = E ˆβv 

> 10

if |Eαu | = 1 and the pertaining node of the edge in Eαu is an S-node then 

// u, v are adjacent in the skeleton of this S-node and are good, so if 

{uα, vβ } is a snarl then it is reported when S-nodes are examined  

> 11

continue ; 

> 12

else  

> 13

Report {uα, vβ }; 

> 14

if |E ˆαu | = 1 and the pertaining node of the edge in E ˆαu is an S-node then  

> 15

continue ; 

> 16

else  

> 17

Report {uˆα, v ˆβ};

Algorithm 7: FindSnarlsBetweenRRnodes (F, H, T )

Input: Sign-cut graph F of a bidirected graph, maximal 2-connected subgraph H of F , SPQR tree 

T of H 

> 1

for {ν, μ } ∈ E(T ) do  

> 2

if ν and μ are R-nodes then  

> 3

eμ ← the virtual edge in skeleton( ν) pertaining to μ; 

> 4

eν ← the virtual edge in skeleton( μ) pertaining to ν; 

> 5

u, v ← the endpoints of eν , e μ; 

> 6

Xμ, X ν ← expansion( eμ), expansion( eν ); 

> 7

if HasDangling (F, H, u ) or HasDangling (F, H, v ) or u is a tip in F or v is a tip in F then  

> 8

continue ; 

> 9

for α, β ∈ { +, −} do  

> 10

if N αH (u) ⊆ V (Xμ) and N ˆαH (u) ⊆ V (Xν ) and N βH (v) ⊆ V (Xμ) and N ˆβH (v) ⊆ V (Xν )

then  

> 11

Report {uα, vβ }, {uˆα, v ˆβ};

54 Algorithm 8: FindEdgeSnarls (F, H, T )

Input: Sign-cut graph F of a bidirected graph, maximal 2-connected subgraph H of F , T the SPQR tree of H 

> 1

for every edge e = {uα, vβ } of H such that u and v are non-tips in F do  

> 2

if no edge in F distinct from e has a vertex-side uα or vβ then  

> 3

Report {uα, vβ }; 

> 4

if no S-node μ of T is such that {u, v } ⊆ V (skeleton( μ)) then  

> 5

Report {uˆα, v ˆβ};

Algorithm 9: Snarls representation algorithm 

Input: Bidirected graph G

Output: A linear-size encoding of snarls of G as two collections: T = {T1, . . . , T k} of vertex-side sets and S = {S1, . . . , S ℓ} of unordered pairs of vertex-sides, where every unordered pair of distinct vertex-sides in Ti is a snarl and each Sj is a snarl.  

> 1

F1, . . . , F k ← BuildSignCutGraphs (G); 

> 2

T ← {} ; 

> 3

S ← {} ; 

> 4

for i ∈ { 1, . . . , k } do  

> 5

if Fi is an isolated vertex then  

> 6

continue ; 

> 7

Ti ← the set of vertex-sides vα where v is a tip in Fi with sign α; 

> 8

T ← T ∪ { Ti}; 

> 9

for every block H of Fi do  

> 10

if H is a multi-bridge then 

// The snarls in multi-bridges are reported in Algorithm 8  

> 11

continue ; 

> 12

else  

> 13

TH ← BuildSPQRTree (H); 

> 14

S ← S ∪ FindSnarlsInSnodes (Fi, H, T H ); 

> 15

S ← S ∪ FindSnarlsInPnodes (Fi, H, T H ); 

> 16

S ← S ∪ FindSnarlsBetweenRRnodes (Fi, H, T H ); 

> 17

S ← S ∪ FindEdgeSnarls (Fi, H, T H ); 

> 18

return (T , S)

55