Title: 2604.02842v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02842v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:34:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
1

# ViraHinter : a dual -modal artificial intelligence framework 

# for predicting virus -host interactions 

Weiqiang Bai 1,2# , Fei Wang 3# , Jialin Wang 1,2# , Sheng Xu 1,2# , Lifeng Qiao 1, 4, Juan Li 5,6,7, Zhuyi Guo 8,

Xiangyun Hou 3, Lei Bai 1, Bowen Zhou 1, Edward C. Holmes 9, Weifeng Shi 3, 8,10 *, Siqi Sun 2*  

> 1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China  

> 2

Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai, China  

> 3

Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China  

> 4

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 

> 5

School of Clinical and Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong 

Academy of Medical Sciences, Ji’nan, China 

> 6

Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases in Universities of Shandong, Shandong First Medical 

University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Ji’nan, China 

> 7

The Second Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University, Taian, China  

> 8

Shanghai Institute of Virology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China  

> 9

School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia  

> 10

School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China  

> #

These authors contributed equally to this study.  

> *

Corresponding author. Email: Weifeng Shi (shiwf@ioz.ac.cn), Siqi Sun (siqisun@fudan.edu.cn) 2

# Abstract 

Protein -protein interactions (PPIs) between a virus and its host govern infection, replication, 

and pathogenesis. While high -throughput mapping has identified thousands of virus -host 

associations, much of the virus -host interactome remains uncharacterized due to the labor -intensive 

nature of experimental screens, the inherent difficulty in capturing transient interactions, and the 

limited sequence homology across divergent viral famili es. Here, we introduce ViraHinter, a dual -

modal deep learning framework for the precise prediction of virus -host interactions and large -scale 

inference of interaction landscapes. ViraHinter couples a structure -generation branch with a 

sequence -representati on branch, integrating structure -informed pair representations with ESM -

derived embeddings to learn generalizable interaction rules across unseen viruses. We benchmark 

ViraHinter on pathogenic coronaviruses and influenza A viruses and show that it consiste ntly 

outperforms RoseTTAFold2 -PPI, AlphaFold 3 and RoseTTAFold2 -Lite in prioritizing high -

confidence candidates even under severe class imbalance and across diverse interface regimes. 

Notably, it successfully identifies novel functionally relevant host fac tors and recapitulates the 

structural plasticity of the complex interfaces. By intersecting predictions across multiple influenza 

subtypes, ViraHinter reveals 33 shared host factors, offering a roadmap for broad -spectrum antiviral 

discovery. ViraHinter the refore serves as a robust computational approach for studying virus -host 

interactions, enabling systematic screening of host factors for all known human -infecting viruses, 

providing new insights into the shared mechanisms of viral pathogenesis, and acceler ating the 

discovery of novel therapeutic targets and the development of broad -spectrum antivirals. 

Keywords 

Virus -host interactions; ViraHinter ; Protein -protein interaction prediction; Coronaviruses; 

Influenza A viruses 3

# Introduction 

Protein -protein interactions (PPIs) between a virus and its host are integral to successful viral 

infection, replication, and pathogenesis. By encoding a limited set of proteins that engage with a 

much larger host proteome, viruses hijack cellular signaling, subvert immune responses, and re direct 

metabolic pathways to create a permissive environment for their own propagation 1,2 . A

comprehensive understanding of virus -host PPIs (vhPPIs) is therefore essential not only for 

elucidating the molecular mechanisms of viral infection but also for identifying novel antiviral 

targets 3. In recent years, high -throughput techniques such as affinity purification -mass spectrometry 

(AP -MS) and proximity labeling have enabled large -scale mapping of vhPPIs, leading to the 

establishment of curated repositories 4,5 . Among these, IntAct offers a deeply curated collection of 

molecular interaction data 6; BioGRID serves as a comprehensive repository encompassing protein, 

genetic, and chemical interaction datasets 7; VirHostNet specializes in the integration and 

visualization of virus –host interaction networks 8; and VirusMentha consolidates virus -host 

interaction data from multiple primary sources into a unified resource 9,10 .

Despite their utility, existing vhPPI databases exhibit inherent limitations that constrain their 

translational application 11 . First, their coverage is determined by the availability of costly and 

labor -intensive experimental studies, leaving most of the virus -host interactome unexplored, 

particularly for emerging pathogens. Second, while advanced proximity -labeling systems (e.g., 

BioID or APEX) have begun to capture temporal snapshots of infection, their reliance on 

complex genetic engineering and specialized cell lines restricts their application in high -

throughput comparative virology. For most emerging or non -model pathogens, the field remains 

constrained by static interactome maps that fail to reflect the transition between viral entry, 

replication, and egress 12 . There remains a critical need for a generalized computational 

framework that can rapidly transition from sequence to structural landscape without the 

prerequisite of lengthy experimental optimization. Third, because viral proteins often evolve 

rapidly and share limited sequence homology across families, knowledge gained from one virus, 

for ins tance, influenza A virus, does not readily transfer to another, such as coronaviruses, 4

despite similarities in the host pathways they target. Consequently, there is a pressing need for 

computational approaches that can distill generalizable principles from existing interaction data 

and accurately predict vhPPIs across viral families in a con text‑aware manner .

In reality, computational methods for predicting PPIs have advanced considerably. Early deep 

learning approaches often rel y on architectures such as long short‑term memory (LSTM) networks 

to extract protein sequence features for PPI prediction 13,14 . However, relying solely on sequence 

information frequently yields poor predictive accuracy as it fails to capture the intricate spatial 

arrangements and physical constraints of interaction interface s15 . To improve performance, 

integrative machine learning frameworks, such as Tapioca, which employs a logistic 

regression -based ensemble approach, have shown promise by combining experimental 

dynamics data with sequence properties to map endogenous protein complexes (i.e., naturally 

occurring interactions within a single host species) 16 . However, these methods have not been 

effectively extended to virus –host interactions, partly because viral proteins frequently exploit short 

linear motifs or mimic host interaction interfaces, creating patterns that diverge from canonical 

host –host interac tions and are poorly captured by homology -based methods alone 17 . Recently, 

structural prediction models such as AlphaFold -Multimer have demonstrated success in modeling 

vhPPI structures, such as those between African swine fever virus (ASFV) and human proteins 18 .

However, these structural methods are computationally intensive for proteome‑wide screening 

across divergent viral families. A model that integrates the broad relational knowledge of 

sequence‑derived embeddings with the physical precision of structural pai r representations could 

learn generalizable interaction rules that transcend individual virus families 19,20 , enabling prediction 

of previously uncharacterized interactions for viruses with scarce experimental data .

Here we introduced ViraHinter, a dual -modal framework designed for high -fidelity 

prediction of virus -host protein -protein interactions and a systematic mapping of virus -host 

interaction landscapes. ViraHinter was trained on a curated, comprehensive compend ium of 

experimentally validated interactions and integrated structure -informed pair representations 

with sequence -derived embeddings to learn generalizable interaction rules across viral and 

human proteomes. We applied the model to pathogenic coronaviruses and influenza viruses and 5

demonstrated its robust performance across varied validation regimes. In these settings, 

ViraHinter successfully recovered biologically authentic interaction patterns supported by 

independent external evidence, confirming that the framework generalizes eff ectively to unseen 

viral families. Beyond interaction ranking, ViraHinter can uncover evolutionarily conserved 

binding interfaces that nominate host targets for broad -spectrum antiviral development, 

providing a scalable platform for characterizing the cons erved host dependencies and virus -

specific mechanisms that govern viral pathogenesis. 

# Results 

## Construction of a High -Fidelity Virus -Host Interaction Atlas 

Fig. 1 | Construction of a high -fidelity virus -host interaction atlas. 

a, Workflow for integrating virus -host PPIs from IntAct, BioGRID, VirHostNet, and VirusMentha. 

Interactions were filtered, confidence -stratified, and deduplicated to generate high -confidence and 

full -resource datasets for training and benchmarking. b, Source -specific rules used to define 

interaction confidence across the four databases . c, UpSet plot showing the overlap of virus -host 

PPIs across source databases .

To construct a high -fidelity atlas of virus -host protein -protein interactions, we established a 

staged integration workflow that harmonized the records from IntAct, BioGRID, VirHostNet and 

VirusMentha (Fig. 1a ). We first retained only virus -host pairs annotated as physical associations, 

excluding non -physical categories such as colocalization and genetic interaction. We employed 6

source -specific confidence strategies across repositories rather than applying a single pooled 

threshold ( Fig. 1b ). In IntAct, entries with an MI score > 0.6 were classified as high confidence and 

those with 0.4 < MI <= 0.6 as medium confidence (MI: molecular interaction confidence score 

summarizing evidence level; see Methods for details). In BioGRID, low -throughput physical 

interactions were prioritized as high confidence, whereas validated high -throughput records were 

retained as medium confidence. In Vi rHostNet, interactions supported by binary interaction 

methods were treated as high‑confidence evidence, whereas other assay types were retained as 

medium confidence. For VirusMentha, because the available annotation did not support a 

comparable medium -confidence tier, only multi -validated records were retained as high 

confidence . After source‑wise filtering, redundant records were collapsed with priority given to the 

highest‑confidence annotation, yielding a curated resource that was subsequently partition ed for 

model development and evaluation .

After filtering and deduplication, the benchmark dataset comprised 10,451 PPIs involving 700 

viral proteins and 4,202 human proteins, whereas the full dataset contained 43,942 PPIs spanning 

1,185 viral proteins and 8,929 human proteins from 31 viral famili es across 20 viral orders 

(Extended Data Table 1) . VirHostNet contributed the largest number of candidate PPIs (32,642) 

to the final repertoire, followed by BioGRID (12,974), IntAct (1,724), and VirusMentha (307). Most 

interactions were database‑specific: 29,451 pairs were unique to VirHostNet, 9,979 unique to 

BioGRID, 1,037 unique to IntAct, and 53 unique to VirusMentha ( Fig. 1c ). The largest non‑unique 

intersection contained 2,584 pairs shared between VirHostNet and VirusMentha, whereas all 

remaining pairwise or higher‑order overlaps were substantially smaller. This pattern indicated that 

current virus –host PPI repositories were complementary rather than interchangeable, and that our 

unified atlas recovered the maximum number of high‑confidence vhPPIs. In addition , we paired 

this curated positive atlas with a conservative hard‑negative set generated by MMseqs2 clustering, 

excluding proteins from clusters containing known binders and removing candidates with sequence 

identity greater than 60% to any positive sample. Together, the positive atlas, hard negative set, and 

virus -held -out split strategy defined the data foundation for subsequent benchmarking .

## The ViraHinter Framework: Dual -Modal Fusion of Sequence and Structure 7

Fig. 2 | ViraHinter architecture and benchmark performance. 

a, Overview of ViraHinter. A structure branch derives structure -informed single and pair 

representations, whereas a sequence branch extracts protein language model embeddings; these 

features are fused for interaction prediction. b,c, Performance of ViraHinter and baseline methods 

on RF2 -PPI benchmark settings with 1:1000 and 1:10 positive -to -negative ratios. d, Performance 

on the RF2 -PPI 1:1000 benchmark stratified by interface size. e, Performance comparison on the 

benchmark generated with viral -level sequence separation. Viral sequences were split so that train -

test sequence identity did not exceed 60%. f, Performance of ViraHinter stratified by the maximum 

sequence identity between each test viral protein and its closest viral sequence in the training set. 

Test pairs were grouped into identity bins, and AUPR was calculated for each bin. g, Performance 

of ViraHinter stratified by viral group. Test pairs were grouped into SARS -CoV, IAV, Herpes, 

HPV, HIV, Hepatitis and Others, and AUPR was calculated for each group. 

ViraHinter is a dual -modal architecture that couples a structure -generation branch with a 

sequence -representation branch and routes the fused features to both structure and interaction heads 

(Fig. 2a ). Given paired human and viral sequences, the structural branch first uses a sequence 8

embedder and a 48 -block Pairformer stack to produce single and pair representations, which are 

then refined by an iterative diffusion module to generate all -atom virus -host complex structures. In 

parallel, the sequence branch extracts ESM -derived embeddings for the human and viral partners 

and combines them through a fusion layer to form a mixed virus -host representation. To focus the 

interaction predictor on intermolecular compatibility rather than monomeric folding signals, the pair 

representation is masked to suppress intra -chain information before feature aggregation. Structure -

derived features are then transferred to the interaction branch through a stop -gradient connection 

and jointly processed with the sequence -derived representation by four additional Pairformer blocks, 

a gated linear layer, and a final fusion‑classification layer, which outputs the interaction probability .

This design enables ViraHinter to leverage explicit geometric context when reliable pairwise 

structural cues are available, while preserving sequence -derived information for cases in which 

structural evidence is weak, such as rapidly evolving or partially disordered viral proteins. The 

model was trained for virus –host interaction prediction using a structure -aware backbone .

Specifically, the structure module was initialized from IntFold 21,22 , after which the model was 

> 22

subset. By integrating both modalities within a single interaction head, ViraHinter ranks candidate 

virus –host pairs while simultaneously generating the corresponding complex structures, rather than 

relying on a post hoc combination of separate predictors .

## Benchmarking and Performance Evaluation 

We next evaluated ViraHinter under the benchmarking settings introduced in the original 

RF2 -PPI study 23 , which tested performance under severe class imbalance and across different 

interface -size regimes ( Fig. 2b –d). Under the stringent 1:1,000 positive -to -negative ratio intended 

to approximate the search space of large -scale screening, ViraHinter achieved an AUPR of 0.44, 

outperforming RF2 -PPI 23 (omicMSA, 0.28), AlphaFold 3(AF3) 24 (0.23), RF2 -PPI (colabMSA, 

0.17) 23 and RF2 -Lite 25 (0.10) (Fig. 2b) . This advantage was maintained in the less imbalanced 

1:10 setting, in which ViraHinter reached an AUPR of 0.77, compared with 0.51 for AF3, 0.42 for 

RF2 -PPI and 0.31 for RF2 -Lite ( Fig. 2c ). To determine whether the improvement was restricted 

to large and readily resolved complexes, w e further stratified the 1:1,000 benchmark by interface 

size, following the evaluation protocol of the RF2 -PPI 23 study. ViraHinter ViraHinter consistently 9

outperformed baseline methods across interfaces of different sizes, achieving AUPRs of 0.11, 0.34, 

and 0.77 on weak (≤10 residues), medium (11 –50 residues), and strong (>50 residues) interfaces, 

respectively. By comparison, RF2 -PPI (omicMSA) achieved 0.05, 0.21, and 0.47, and AF3 achieved 

0.00, 0.06, and 0.14 across the same bins ( Fig. 2d ). Interface size was defined following the RF2 -

PPI protocol, based on the number of residues at the binding site of the experimentally determined 

protein –protein complex. Together, these results showed that ViraHinter consistently outperformed 

existing methods across the benchmark regimes established by RF2 -PPI, including settings with 

extreme class imbalance and limited i nterface size .

We next assessed ViraHinter on additional virus -host benchmarks constructed with data -

partitioning schemes designed to reduce viral leakage (Fig. 2e -g) . In the benchmark partitioned 

by viral sequence identity, where test viral proteins shared at most 60% sequence identity with 

the closest viral proteins in the training set, ViraHinter yielded an AUPR of 0.50, a 4.5 -fold 

improvement over AF3 (0.11) and more than 6 -fold over both RF2 -PPI and RF2 -Lite (0.08) 

(Fig. 2e) . This margin was notably wider than that observed in the RF2 -PPI benchmark settings 

(Fig. 2b -d) , suggesting that the dual -modal architecture is particularly effective when sequence 

homology to training data is limited, precisely the scenario encountered with emerging or 

understudied pathogens. Because comparable training -set identities could not be defined 

uniformly for all baseline methods, we next examined ViraHinter alone as a function of viral 

sequence identity to the training set (Fig. 2f) . Across all populated identity bins, ViraHinter 

retained measurable predictive power, with AUPRs of 0.42 for test viral proteins with 10 –20% 

identity to the closest training viral sequence, 0.45 for 20 –30%, 0.38 for 30 –40%, 0.59 for 40 –50% 

and 0.65 for 50 –60% .

Test pairs were grouped into viral categories, including SARS -CoV (including SARS -CoV -

1 and SARS -CoV -2) , Influenza A Virus (IAV), Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Human 

Papillomavirus (HPV) , herpesviruses(Herpes) , hepatitis viruses(Hepatitis) and an Other category 

(Extended Data Table 2) , and ViraHinter consistently outperformed AF3, RF2 -PPI and RF2 -Lite 

across all groups in this benchmark (Fig. 2g) . ViraHinter achieved the highest AUPR on HPV (0.69), 

followed by SARS -CoV (0.58), HIV (0.56) and IAV (0.52), whereas performance was lower for 10 

the hepatitis virus group (0.41), the herpesvirus group (0.38) and the Other category (0.31), but still 

remained clearly above the baselines .These analyses, together with the RF2 -PPI benchmarks above, 

indicated that ViraHinter generalized across diverse viral groups and retained predictive utility even 

for divergent viral sequences with low training -set homology .

## Validation of ViraHinter against experimental host -coronavirus interactomes 

Fig. 3 | Evidence -aware validation on coronavirus interactions. 

a, Distribution of ViraHinter prediction probabilities for 958 candidate coronavirus –host interaction 

pairs, stratified by BioGRID confidence levels: Low (no qualifying evidence, n=575), Medium 

(high -throughput evidence, n=268), and High (experimentally verif ied, n=115). Box plots represent 

the median and interquartile range (IQR); whiskers extend to 1.5 times×IQR. *** P < 0.001, 

Kruskal -Wallis test. b, Fraction and enrichment of the supported interaction pairs within the top 10% 

of ViraHinter predictions. Percentages indicate the proportion of known pairs recovered from the 

total available pairs in each category; values in parentheses represent fold enrichment over random 

expectation. c, Fold enrichment of the supported pairs across a continuous range of prediction -rank 

thresholds (top 1% to 50%). ViraHinter (solid lines) consistently maintains a superior enrichment 11 

profile over AF3 (dashed lines) for both high -confidence (blue) and low and no -confidence (orange) 

interactions. Dotted gray line represents random expectation (fold enrichment =1). d, Predicted 

shared interaction networks for eight prioritized host factors (RAB8A, RAB5C, PABPC1, DNAJB9, 

KPNA4, POGLUT2, CUL2 and PMPCB) across the three pathogenic coronaviruses. Viral bait 

proteins are colored by virus: SARS -CoV -1 (blue), SARS -CoV -2 (ora nge), and MERS -CoV (green). 

Gray edges represent known interactions docu mented in BioGRID. Red edges denote de novo 

discoveries predicted by ViraHinter that expand the binding profile of these factors across the three 

coronaviruses .

To evaluate the predictive fidelity of ViraHinter, we benchmarked the framework against 958 

candidate virus –host protein pairs from SARS -CoV -2, SARS -CoV -1, and MERS -CoV, originally 

identified via high -throughput AP -MS 5. After removing training set overlaps to ensure a de -

leaked interaction -level validation, we categorized the benchmarked pairs using external 

BioGRID records: (i) high -throughput (HT) evidence, (ii) low -throughput (LT) evidence, and 

(iii) no qualifying evid ence (Extended Data Table 3) . Predicted interaction probabilities 

differed significantly across these categories, with the highest scores assigned to the pairs with 

experimentally verified (LT) evidence and the lowest scores assigned to the pairs without 

available evidence (Fig. 3a) . This ordering indicated that ViraHinter preferentially ranked 

coronavirus interaction candidates with stronger independent support toward the top of the predicted 

probability list. The practical utility of ViraHinter lay in its ability to prioritize cand idates for 

experimental validation. In an enrichment analysis of the top 10% of the predictions (Extended 

Data Table 3) , we observed a substantial overrepresentation of the validated interactors. 

Specifically, ViraHinter recove red 27.8% of experimentally verified interactions, representing a 

2.78 -fold enrichment over random expectation (Fig. 3b) . Notably, pairs lacking evidence were 

markedly depleted (0.63 -fold enrichment), whereas pairs with HT evidence showed only marginal 

gains (1.04 -fold; Fig. 3b) . This sensitivity to "evidence quality" rather than simple record presence 

allows ViraHinter to effectively identify high -confidence targets. Robustness analysis revealed that 

the supported interactions remain enriched across the en tire spectrum of ranking cutoffs (Fig. 3c). 

The enrichment was most pronounced for experimentally verified pairs, peaking at ~4.0 -fold within 

the highest -confidence window (top 1% -5%) (Fig. 3c). When benchmarked against AF3, ViraHinter 

consistently maintained a superior enrichment profile, particularly in the critical high -confidence 12 

region (Fig. 3c). For both “ high -confidence” (LT evidence) and the broader “low and no 

evidence”(HT evidence and no qualifying evidence) categories, ViraHinter's recovery outperformed 

AF3’s across the majority of the ranking window (Fig. 3c). These results underscored the robust, 

evidence -aware ranking capability of ViraHinter that prioritizes reliable, physically verified PPIs 

for downstream study .

We next utilized ViraHinter to uncover conserved host dependencies potentially missed 

by traditional mapping. By prioritizing the top 100 host genes (Extended Data Table 4) , the 

framework identified eight with predicted binding profiles that diverged significantly from existing 

records (Fig. 3d) . Most notably, ViraHinter found seven factors (PABPC1, RAB8A, RAB5C, CUL2, 

KPNA4, PMPCB, and POGLUT2) to be potential pan -coronavirus targets as they were shared by 

all the three coronaviruses (Fig. 3d) . Network analysis revealed extensive "New discoveries" (red 

edges) for these factors, such as RAB8A and RAB5C, which were predicted to engage a broad array 

of viral baits as universal machinery for trafficking or replication (Fig. 3d) . Additionally, DNAJB9 

exhibited an expanded profile, transitioning from a single -virus to a pan -coronavirus interactor 

(Fig. 3d). These high -priority candidates represented functional interactors whose broader roles 

were likely masked in physical repositories due to transient binding.To provide a mechanistic basis 

for these shared dependencies, we modelled the structural interfaces between RAB8A and NSP7 

from all three coronaviruses. NSP7 is a critical comp onent of the viral replication -transcription 

complex (RTC) (Extended Data Fig. 2a). Structural analysis revealed a strikingly conserved 

binding mode across these divergent coronaviruses . Despite significant sequence variations between 

the NSP7 orthologs, the predicted binding interfaces were virtually coincident, converging upon an 

identical functional cleft on RAB8A (Extended Data Fig. 2a) . The nearly identical spatial 

orientation and high geometric complementarity suggested that the NSP7 -RAB8A interaction 

axis was evolutionarily conserved, implying that RAB8A is an indispensable cellular node and 

hence likely a robust, broad‑spectrum therapeutic target resistant to mutational escape .

## ViraHinter identifies conserved and subtype -specific host -influenza interactomes 13 

Fig. 4 | Identification and network characterization of shared host factors across H1N1, H3N2, 

and H9N2 influenza viruses .

ViraHinter was applied to H1N1, H3N2 and H9N2 in a virus -held -out setting; the evaluated 

influenza viruses were excluded from training, and highly similar external records were also 

removed during evidence lookup. a, Gene -level composition of the predicted host factors in the top 

100 ranked candidates. Categories represent subtype -specific host factors (H1N1, H3N2, or H9N2 

only), pairwise -shared host factors, and factors shared by all the three subtypes (Shared). 

Perc entages are calculated relative to all host genes. b, Heatmap showing the distribution of host 

genes across individual viral baits in the top 100 predictions, stratified by the categories defined in 

panel b. Row categories indicate the specificity of the h ost factor (e.g., Shared vs. H3N2 only). c, 

Shared host -factor interaction network formed by the core host genes targeted by all three influenza 

subtypes in the top 100 predictions. Colored diamond nodes denote viral proteins from H1N1 (red), 

H3N2 (green), and H9N2 (yellow); light blue circles repr esent shared human proteins, while dark 

blue circles indicate shared host factors with independent supporting evidence (e.g., SFN, RAB11A, 

CDK1). Edge thickness or length reflects the ViraHinter interaction score. d, Structural conservation 

of the HA -RAB11A interaction interface. Predicted complex structures of human RAB11A (orange) 

in association with HA proteins (green) from H1N1, H3N2, and H9N2 strains are shown .

Influenza A viruses are characterized by rapid mutation and antigenic shifts that create a 

diverse array of antigenically distinct subtypes 26 . To investigate whether human and avian -14 

origin influenza viruses exploit a shared set of host factors, we performed a comparative 

analysis using three representative subtypes: two human -infecting subtypes, the seasonal 

A/Nagasaki/07N020/2008 (H1N1) strain and the seasonal A/China/JN22022/2022 (H 3N2) 

strain, alongside an avian -origin A/chicken/Korea/KNUGJ09/2009 (H9N2) strain. Utilizing 

ViraHinter, we conducted an exhaustive screen for the 10 essential proteins (PB2, NS1, NEP, 

M2, M1, NP, HA, PA, PB1, and NA) from the isolated H3N2 strain (isolate d and sequenced in 

our laboratory in 2025), along with H1N1 and H9N2 against the human proteome utilizing 

ViraHinter. To ensure rigorous validation, the viruses evaluated were excluded from training 

at the subtype level, and external evidence was de -leake d by removing records that overlapped 

with or shared high sequence identity with the training set. Comparative analysis revealed a 

stable pan -influenza core within the host -targeted interaction landscape (Fig. 4a and Extended 

Data Fig. 3a) . In the Top 100 predictions, 34.4% of the host factors were shared across all three 

subtypes (Fig. 4a) , which expanded to 56.5% in the top 1000, highlighting the framework’s 

consistence. Concurrently, distinct strain -specific profiles were identified: in the top 100, 

H1N1 -only interactions accounted for 12.5%, compared to 14.6% for H3N2 and 9.4% for 

H9N2 (Fig. 4a) . As the evaluation depth increased to the Top 1000, these lineage -specific ratios 

shifted to 5.3% for H1N1, 5.1% for H3N2, and 4.8% for H9N2 (Extended Data Fig. 3a) . The 

observation that shared interactions consistently dwarf strain -specific counts highlights 

ViraHinter’s ability to identify the "evolutionary bottleneck" of host factors essential for pan -

influenza pathogenesis, effectively filtering out stochastic no ise to reveal a robust core of 

conserved dependencies .

To distinguish high -affinity primary targets from broader functional networks, we 

performed a systematic deconvolution of the predicted interactomes (Fig. 4b) . In the Top 100, 

the shared interactome was anchored by "hub" proteins with consistent targeting across 

subtypes: NS1 emerged as the primary anchor (n=20 common factors), followed by M1 (n=18), 

NP (n=15), and HA (n=15) ( Fig. 4b ). At this high -confidence threshold, the polymerase 

subunits ( PB2 and PB1 ) exhibited minimal shared interactions ( Fig. 4b ). This observation is 

consistent with their roles as highly conserved replicase proteins, suggesting that their primary 

high -affinity targets are restricted to highly specialized cellular nodes or involve transient 15 

associations required for the precision of the viral replication cycle. Interestingly, M1 exhibited 

a lineage -specific signature in H3N2 strain (n=7), potentially reflecting subtype -specific 

variations in how the matrix protein engages cellular machinery (Fig. 4b) . Expanding the 

analysis to the top 1000 interactions revealed a dramatic scaling of the shared core (Extended 

Data Fig. 3b) . The shared interactors for NS1 increased tenfold (n=196), with significant 

expansions for HA (n=173), NEP (n=167) and M1 (n=148). Crucially, the polymerase subunits 

(PB1, PA, and PB2) emerged as robust shared hubs at this depth. While the requirement of a

conserved cellular network for viral replication is well -established, ViraHinter’s sensitivity at 

this threshold reveals the full scale of this shared infrastructure, capturing the broader array of 

transient or lower -affinity associations that are often underrepresented in high -stringency 

experimental datasets. The predominance of the shared counts over subtype -specific ones (e.g., 

NS1 shared 196 vs. H3N2 -only 1) underscores ViraHinter’s ability to identify evolutionarily 

conserved characterizations in IAV pathogenesis .

By intersecting the top 100 interactors for H1N1, H9N2, and H3N2 (Extended Data 

Table 5) , we identified a coherent network of 33 common host factors targeted by all three 

strains (Fig. 4c, Extended Data Table 5) . Functional mapping (Extended Data Fig. 4d) 

revealed that these factors are distributed across five primary modules: (i) vesicular transport, 

(ii) cytoskeleton, (iii) chromatin and DNA damage, (iv) RNA metabolism and splicing, and (v) 

signal transduction and cycle regulation. Several key nodes exh ibit critical cross -functional 

roles; notably, CDK1 bridges signal transduction with chromatin integrity 27,28 , while HMGB1 

and HMGB2 coordinate RNA transcription and splicing with chromatin -mediated DNA 

repair 29,30 . To validate the biological relevance of this predicted core, we cross -referenced these 

candidates with independent experimental literature. Among the 33 core factors, 12 host factors 

(including SFN, RAB11A, RAB11B, ARF3, CDK1, SRSF3, SRSF7, RHOA, HMGB1, AR F4, 

PPP6C and KRT13) currently lack physical interaction evidence with IAV -encoded proteins in 

the virus -host interaction databases but have been documented to regulate host immune 

responses specifically during IAV infection 31 -42 (Extended Data Table 6 ). A further 18 factors 

(KAT15, ARF6, RAP2C, RAP2B, RAB1B, RAB1A, RAB5A, KRT19, ACTA1, HMGB2, 

RAB8B, ACTC1, H2AX, RAP1A, RAB8A, TUBB3, TUBB2B and RAB6B) have been 16 

reported to modulate immune responses to other viruses 33 43 -59 (Extended Data Table 6). This 

finding demonstrates that ViraHinter’s dual -modal architecture effectively compensates for 

experimental limitations by identifying elusive but functionally essential host targets through 

structural and sequence -derived signatures. 

Because the influenza virus analysis involved proteome -scale screening against the full 

human protein repertoire, we adopted a multi -stage candidate selection strategy to make large -

scale evaluation computationally tractable. Candidate virus -host pairs were first prescreened 

using a lightweight sequence -only model (see Methods for details) and were then rescored with 

the full ViraHinter model. For downstream prioritization, the top 100 candidates were further 

reranked using a composite score i ntegrating the full -model interaction score, ipTM and the 

sequence -only score, thereby balancing predicted interaction strength, structural c onfidence 

and sequence -based support. This formula integrates the model's structural complementarity 

features (see Methods for details), the interface confidence (ipTM), and evolutionary sequence 

conservation into a single prioritized metric (Extended Data Table 5) .

Finally, atomic -level modeling of the interaction between RAB11A and HA from H3N2, 

H1N1, and H9N2 provided a mechanistic rationale for these shared dependencies (Fig. 4d). 

RAB11A emerged as a cornerstone of the shared network. Despite the extensive sequence 

plasticity and antigenic diversity among HA subtypes, ViraHinter predicted a strikingly 

conserved binding mode, with the HA proteins from all three subtypes converging o n an 

identical functional cleft on the RAB11A surface (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 3c) . This 

structural consistency suggested that RAB11A may represent an essential evolutionary 

bottleneck for influenza viruses. In particular, the requirement to maintain high -affinity docking 

with the RAB11A machinery imposes a strong negative selection pre ssure on the interaction 

interface .

# Discussion 

We present ViraHinter, a dual -modal framework that integrates structure -informed pair 

representations with sequence -derived features for virus -host protein -protein interaction 17 

prediction. By combining a curated multi -source interaction atlas with staged training across 

general protein complexes, broad PPI data, and progressively refined virus -host subsets, 

ViraHinter supports both candidate ranking and structure -aware interpreta tion within a unified 

model. The benchmarking analyses showed that this architecture not only outperformed state -

of -the -art models like AF3 24 and RF2 -PPI in large -scale ranking scenarios, particularly under 

severe class imbalance, but also provided a mechanistic lens through which to interpret 

conserved pathogenic strategies .

A primary contribution of ViraHinter was its ability to "rescue" functionally essential 

interactions that were generally missed by traditional proteomics. Physical interaction 

repositories, while invaluable, were often biased toward stable complexes, faili ng to capture 

the transient or low -affinity associations that define viral hijacking. In our coronavirus analysis, 

ViraHinter prioritized a core set of shared host factors, including RAB8A, RAB5C, and CUL2; 

although many lacked prior physical evidence, the model identified them as pan -viral anchors. 

Similarly, in the influenza analysis, the framework identified 33 common host factors, 12 of 

which (including SFN and RAB11A) have been shown to regulate host immunity during IAV 

infection despite the absence of physical interaction records in existing vhPPI databases 31,37 .

This "functional rescue" underscored the utility of ViraHinter’s dual -modal design, which 

leveraged structural compatibility to identify elusive yet biologically authentic targets .

Of particular note was that ViraHinter highlighted the existence of the evolutionary 

conservation of conserved aspects of interaction between influenza virus and the host proteome. 

While surface proteins like HA and NA undergo rapid antigenic evolution, in ternal replication 

proteins, and the host response to them, remained highly conserved. ViraHinter captured this 

by identifying a stable pan -influenza core anchored by conserved proteins such as M1 and NS1. 

Crucially, comparative structural modeling of two key interaction axes, RAB11A in complex 

with HA from three influenza subtypes (H1N1, H3N2, and H9N2) and RAB8A with NSP7 

from three pathogenic coronaviruses (SARS -CoV -1, SARS -CoV -2, and MERS -CoV), revealed 

strikingly coincident binding modes. Despite the evolutionary divergence of these viral 

proteins, they converge on virtually identical functional clefts on their respective host targets, 18 

RAB11A and RAB8A. The ability of ViraHinter to capture these structurally "locked" 

interfaces, even in the absence of high sequence homology, underscores its utility in identifying 

robust, broad -spectrum therapeutic targets.. Such insights are instrumenta l for developing 

interventions that are inherently resistant to the rapid mutational escape typical of seasonal and 

pandemic influenza strains. Furthermore, ViraHinter also demonstrated robust generalization 

in data -scarce scenarios, manifest in its abilit y to characterize the H3N2 strain identified in our 

laboratory and the data -limited H1N1 and H9N2 viruses, such that it is ideally suited to 

monitoring emerging zoonotic threat s. 

Although ViraHinter exceled at interaction ranking and binding region identification, 

residue -level precision in side -chain packing, it clearly requires further refinement to match 

high -resolution cryo -EM data. Future iterations will incorporate iterative wet -lab validation to 

fill existing data gaps and hence reduce bias in the structural data sets. By bridging structural 

biology with functional proteomics, ViraHinter represents a powerful platform for comparative 

virology. enabling the rapid identificatio n of pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic targets 

across different human -infecting viral families .

# References 

1. Kruse, T. , et al. Large scale discovery of coronavirus -host factor protein interaction motifs 

reveals SARS -CoV -2 specific mechanisms and vulnerabilities. Nat Commun 12 , 6761 (2021). 

2. Stukalov, A. , et al. Multilevel proteomics reveals host perturbations by SARS -CoV -2 and 

SARS -CoV. Nature 594 , 246 -252 (2021). 

3. Gordon, D.E. , et al. A SARS -CoV -2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug 

repurposing. Nature 583 , 459 -468 (2020). 

4. Zhao, X., Zheng, X., Liang, Z., Zheng, C. & Shang, P. Identification of Virus -Host Protein 

Interactions Via Proteomic Techniques. Methods Mol Biol 2940 , 151 -163 (2025). 

5. Gordon, D.E. , et al. Comparative host -coronavirus protein interaction networks reveal pan -viral 

disease mechanisms. Science 370 (2020). 

6. Del Toro, N. , et al. The IntAct database: efficient access to fine -grained molecular interaction 

data. Nucleic Acids Res 50 , D648 -D653 (2022). 

7. Chatr -Aryamontri, A. , et al. The BioGRID interaction database: 2015 update. Nucleic Acids Res 

43 , D470 -478 (2015). 

8. Navratil, V. , et al. VirHostNet: a knowledge base for the management and the analysis of 

proteome -wide virus -host interaction networks. Nucleic Acids Res 37 , D661 -668 (2009). 19 

9. Saha, D., Iannuccelli, M., Brun, C., Zanzoni, A. & Licata, L. The Intricacy of the Viral -Human 

Protein Interaction Networks: Resources, Data, and Analyses. Front Microbiol 13 , 849781 

(2022). 

10. Calderone, A., Licata, L. & Cesareni, G. VirusMentha: a new resource for virus -host protein 

interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 43 , D588 -592 (2015). 

11. Iuchi, H. , et al. Bioinformatics approaches for unveiling virus -host interactions. Comput Struct 

Biotechnol J 21 , 1774 -1784 (2023). 

12. Hashimoto, Y., Sheng, X., Murray -Nerger, L.A. & Cristea, I.M. Temporal dynamics of protein 

complex formation and dissociation during human cytomegalovirus infection. Nat Commun 11 ,

806 (2020). 

13. Noor, F. & Tahir Ul Qamar, M. Comprehensive review and assessment of machine learning 

approaches for host -pathogen protein -protein interaction prediction. Brief Bioinform 27 (2026). 

14. Soleymani, F., Paquet, E., Viktor, H., Michalowski, W. & Spinello, D. Protein -protein 

interaction prediction with deep learning: A comprehensive review. Comput Struct Biotechnol 

J 20 , 5316 -5341 (2022). 

15. Mou, M., Zhang, Z., Pan, Z. & Zhu, F. Deep Learning for Predicting Biomolecular Binding 

Sites of Proteins. Research (Wash D C) 8, 0615 (2025). 

16. Reed, T.J., Tyl, M.D., Tadych, A., Troyanskaya, O.G. & Cristea, I.M. Tapioca: a platform for 

predicting de novo protein -protein interactions in dynamic contexts. Nat Methods 21 , 488 -500 

(2024). 

17. Bogdanow, B. , et al. Structural host -virus interactome profiling of intact infected cells. Nat 

Commun 16 , 6713 (2025). 

18. Fenster, J.A. , et al. African Swine Fever Virus Protein -Protein Interaction Prediction. Viruses 

16 (2024). 

19. Wang, X. , et al. DeepHVI: A multimodal deep learning framework for predicting human -virus 

protein -protein interactions using protein language models. Biosaf Health 7, 257 -266 (2025). 

20. Lin, Z. , et al. Evolutionary -scale prediction of atomic -level protein structure with a language 

model. Science 379 , 1123 -1130 (2023). 

21. Qiao, L., et al. IntFold: A Controllable Foundation Model for General and Specialized 

Biomolecular Structure Prediction. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02025 (2025). 

22. Qiao, L.f., et al. IntelliFold -2: Surpassing AlphaFold 3 via Architectural Refinement and 

Structural Consistency. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.09.704787 (2026). 

23. Zhang, J. , et al. Predicting protein -protein interactions in the human proteome. Science 390 ,

eadt1630 (2025). 

24. Abramson, J. , et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 

3. Nature 630 , 493 -500 (2024). 

25. Humphreys, I.R. , et al. Protein interactions in human pathogens revealed through deep learning. 

Nat Microbiol 9, 2642 -2652 (2024). 

26. Petrova, V.N. & Russell, C.A. The evolution of seasonal influenza viruses. Nat Rev Microbiol 

16 , 60 (2018). 

27. Fernandez -Casanas, M. , et al. Centromere protection requires strict mitotic inactivation of the 

Bloom syndrome helicase complex. Nat Commun 16 , 7832 (2025). 20 

28. Khan, A. , et al. A SETD2 -CDK1 -lamin axis maintains nuclear morphology and genome 

stability. Nat Cell Biol 27 , 1327 -1341 (2025). 

29. Mandke, P. & Vasquez, K.M. Interactions of high mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) with 

nucleic acids: Implications in DNA repair and immune responses. DNA Repair (Amst) 83 ,

102701 (2019). 

30. Reeves, R. High mobility group (HMG) proteins: Modulators of chromatin structure and DNA 

repair in mammalian cells. DNA Repair (Amst) 36 , 122 -136 (2015). 

31. Ganti, K., Han, J., Manicassamy, B. & Lowen, A.C. Rab11a mediates cell -cell spread and 

reassortment of influenza A virus genomes via tunneling nanotubes. PLoS Pathog 17 , e1009321 

(2021). 

32. Guo, J. , et al. A genome -wide base -editing screen uncovers a pivotal role of paxillin delta 

ubiquitination in influenza virus infection. Cell Rep 44 , 115748 (2025). 

33. Huang, Y., Urban, C., Hubel, P., Stukalov, A. & Pic hlmair, A. Protein turnover regulation is 

critical for influenza A virus infection. Cell Syst 15 , 911 -929 e918 (2024). 

34. Kazer, S.W. , et al. Primary nasal influenza infection rewires tissue -scale memory response 

dynamics. Immunity 57 , 1955 -1974 e1958 (2024). 

35. Li, M.Y. , et al. ARF4 -mediated intracellular transport as a broad -spectrum antiviral target. Nat 

Microbiol 10 , 710 -723 (2025). 

36. Sun, H. , et al. Genome -wide CRISPR screen identifies STK11 as a critical regulator of sialic 

acid clusters important for influenza A virus attachment. J Adv Res (2025). 

37. Waqas, F.H. , et al. NRF2 activators inhibit influenza A virus replication by interfering with 

nucleo -cytoplasmic export of viral RNPs in an NRF2 -independent manner. PLoS Pathog 19 ,

e1011506 (2023). 

38. Zhang, Z., Lu, B. & Zeng, B. ARF3 knockdown inhibits influenza a virus and virus -induced 

pneumonia. Virus Genes 61 , 554 -561 (2025). 

39. Zhao, L. , et al. Host -specific SRSF7 regulates polymerase activity and replication of influenza 

A virus. Microbes Infect 26 , 105401 (2024). 

40. Zhao, L. , et al. SRSF3 facilitates replication of influenza A virus via binding and promoting the 

transport of viral mRNA. Vet Microbiol 266 , 109343 (2022). 

41. Zhao, L. , et al. The CDK1 inhibitor, Ro -3306, is a potential antiviral candidate against influenza 

virus infection. Antiviral Res 201 , 105296 (2022). 

42. Turner, A.H., et al. Rab11B is required for binding and entry of recent H3N2, but not H1N1, 

influenza A isolates. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.23.650275 (2025). 

43. Abbasi, A. , et al. Serum extracellular vesicle RNA profiles in long COVID: insights from 

exercise -induced gene modulation. Sci Rep 16 , 3469 (2026). 

44. Davidson, L.A. , et al. Mining bulk transcriptomic datasets identifies inflammasome activation 

and antigen presentation as key novel mechanisms of BK polyomavirus -associated nephropathy. 

J Pathol 268 , 288 -297 (2026). 

45. Jiao, H. , et al. Deep Insight Into Long Non -coding RNA and mRNA Transcriptome Profiling 

in HepG2 Cells Expressing Genotype IV Swine Hepatitis E Virus ORF3. Front Vet Sci 8,

625609 (2021). 21 

46. Kang, H., Kang, T., Jackson, L., Murphy, A. & Nitta, T. Evidence for Involvement of ADP -

Ribosylation Factor 6 in Intracellular Trafficking and Release of Murine Leukemia Virus Gag. 

Cells 13 (2024). 

47. Li, C. , et al. RAB1A promotes hepatitis B virus replication by enhancing PPARalpha -mediated 

viral transcription and inducing ULK1 -mediated autophagy. Int J Biol Macromol 321 , 146301 

(2025). 

48. Li, M. , et al. Serological and Molecular Characterization of Hepatitis B Virus Infection in 

Gastric Cancer. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 12 , 894836 (2022). 

49. Li, W. , et al. Characteristic of HPV Integration in the Genome and Transcriptome of Cervical 

Cancer Tissues. Biomed Res Int 2018 , 6242173 (2018). 

50. Li, W. , et al. Oncogenic KSHV -encoded interferon regulatory factor upregulates HMGB2 and 

CMPK1 expression to promote cell invasion by disrupting a complex lncRNA -OIP5 -AS1/miR -

218 -5p network. PLoS Pathog 15 , e1007578 (2019). 

51. Li, X. , et al. Proteomic characteristics of the treatment trajectory of patients with COVID -19. 

Arch Virol 169 , 84 (2024). 

52. Ming, X. , et al. Pseudorabies virus kinase UL13 phosphorylates H2AX to foster viral replication. 

FASEB J 36 , e22221 (2022). 

53. Salyers, Z.R., Coleman, M., Le, D. & Ryan, T.E. AAV -mediated expression of PFKFB3 in 

myofibers, but not endothelial cells, improves ischemic muscle function in mice with critical 

limb ischemia. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 323 , H424 -H436 (2022). 

54. Xin, J. , et al. Exploring the antiviral potential of shikimic acid against Chikungunya virus 

through network pharmacology, molecular docking, and in vitro experiments. Front Vet Sci 12 ,

1524812 (2025). 

55. Yang, W. , et al. SNX32 is a host restriction factor that degrades African swine fever virus 

CP204L via the RAB1B -dependent autophagy pathway. J Virol 98 , e0159923 (2024). 

56. Ying, G. , et al. Small GTPases Rab8a and Rab11a Are Dispensable for Rhodopsin Transport in 

Mouse Photoreceptors. PLoS One 11 , e0161236 (2016). 

57. Yoo, S.Y., Jeong, S.N., Kang, J.I. & Lee, S.W. Chimeric Adeno -Associated Virus -Mediated 

Cardiovascular Reprogramming for Ischemic Heart Disease. ACS Omega 3, 5918 -5925 (2018). 

58. Zhang, S. , et al. CCL20 secreted by KRT15(high) tumor Cells promotes tertiary lymphoid 

structure formation and enhances anti -PD -1 therapy response in HPV(+)HNSCC. Cell Death 

Dis 17 , 150 (2025). 

59. Zhao, Z. , et al. Hepatitis B virus promotes its own replication by enhancing RAB5A -mediated 

dual activation of endosomal and autophagic vesicle pathways. Emerg Microbes Infect 12 ,

2261556 (2023). 

# Methods 

Assembly of the virus –host interaction resource 

We assembled a curated virus –host protein –protein interaction (PPI) resource by integrating 

records from IntAct, BioGRID, VirHostNet and VirusMentha. To focus on experimentally 22 

supported physical associations, we retained only human –virus interaction pairs annotated as 

physical interactions and excluded ambiguous categories such as colocalization and genetic 

interaction. Because the evidence systems and annotation schemes differe d substantially across 

repositories, we assigned interaction confidence within each source rather than by applying a single 

pooled criterion across all databases. 

For IntAct, interaction confidence was stratified using the database -provided Molecular 

Interaction (MI) score, a quantitative estimate of confidence in a given interaction derived from a 

normalized and weighted count of independent interaction evidence an d associated experimental 

methods. In the IntAct implementation, the score reflects the amount and quality of supporting 

evidence, including the interaction detection method, interaction type and number of supporting 

publications. Interactions with MI > 0. 6 were classified as high confidence, whereas interactions 

with 0.4 < MI <= 0.6 were classified as medium confidence. For BioGRID, low -throughput physical 

interactions were retained as high confidence, whereas high -throughput records were retained only 

when supported by additional validation and were assigned to the medium -confidence tier. For 

VirHostNet, binary assays w ere treated as high -confidence evidence, whereas complex -oriented 

assays were retained as medium confidence. For VirusMentha, only multi -va lidated records were 

retained as high confidence because the available annotation did not support a comparable medium -

confidence tier. 

After source -specific filtering, redundant records were collapsed with priority assigned to the 

highest -confidence annotation available for each interaction pair. This procedure yielded a unified 

virus –host interaction atlas comprising high -confidence and medium -confidence subsets, which 

were subsequently used for model development, fine -tuning and benchmarking. 

Construction of negative samples 

To avoid overly optimistic performance estimates arising from naïve random sampling, we 

constructed a conservative hard -negative set using an MMseqs2 -based clustering strategy. Human 

and viral protein sequences were clustered at a sequence similarity threshold of 0.6. For each viral 

protein, we excluded its known human binding partners and human proteins belonging to the same 

clusters as those binders, thereby reducing contamination of the negative pool by close homologs 23 

of known positives. We then removed candidate negatives whose local sequence identity to any 

positive sample exceeded 0.6. From the remaining candidate pool, we sampled negatives at a 1:10 

positive -to -negative ratio. This design minimizes the inclusion of trivially separable negatives, 

thereby requiring the model to distinguish experimentally validated binders from non -binders that 

are sequence -dissimilar yet biologically plausible. 

Dataset partitioning and leakage control 

For the high -confidence dataset, we allocated 10% of interaction pairs to a validation set, 10% 

to a test set, and used the remaining pairs for model training and fine -tuning. Training and test 

partitions were separated by enforcing a maximum viral sequenc e identity of 0.6 between the two 

sets; that is, no test viral sequence shared more than 60% sequence identity with any viral sequence 

in the training set. This design reduced viral leakage and enabled evaluation on sequence -dissimilar 

viral proteins rathe r than on closely related viral homologs. 

Additional leakage -control procedures depended on the benchmark design. In the external 

coronavirus benchmark, overlapping interaction pairs were removed from the training set before 

evaluation. Accordingly, this analysis represented a de -leaked interaction -level validation rather 

than a fully virus -held -out setting, because coronavirus proteins remained well represented in 

currently available virus –host interaction resources. 

Model architecture 

ViraHinter was implemented as a dual -modal framework that coupled a structure -generation 

branch with a sequence -representation branch and routed the fused features to both structure and 

interaction heads. The model took paired human and viral protein seque nces as input. 

In the structural branch, input sequences were processed using an IntFold backbone initialized 

from open -source pretrained weights. The structural backbone remained fully frozen during virus –

host training. It generated structure -informed single and pair re presentations for the human –virus 

pair, which were then used by the downstream interaction module. Consistent with the architecture 

described in the main text, the structural branch followed a Pairformer -based design and provided 

intermediate representatio ns for both complex -structure modeling and interaction scoring. 24 

To focus the interaction predictor on intermolecular compatibility rather than monomeric 

folding alone, we masked intra -chain regions of the pair representation before feature aggregation 

so that the downstream predictor emphasized inter -chain signals enco ding interface compatibility. 

In parallel, the sequence branch extracted protein language model embeddings using ESM2 -150M 

for the human and viral proteins. We fused these sequence -derived features with the structure -

derived representations and refined the m through the interaction -prediction module to generate the 

final interaction probability. 

Input features and MSA generation 

The inputs to ViraHinter comprised paired human and viral protein sequences. We generated 

multiple -sequence alignments (MSAs) using the same search strategy, databases and database 

versions as those used for AF3. Specifically, MSA generation followed the ColabFold pipeline with 

Jackhmmer -based sequence retrieval. By matching the upstream MSA generation procedure to AF3, 

we reduced the impact of inconsistent alignment construction and maintained a fairer comparison 

between ViraHinter and AF3 -based structural baselines. 

Training procedure 

We initialized the structural branch from the open -source IntFoldV1 weights and trained the 

model directly on curated virus –host interaction data. Training proceeded in two main stages: 

adaptation on the broader medium -confidence virus –host atlas, followed by fine -tuning on the high -

confidence subset. This design transferred structure -aware representations to the virus –host setting 

while avoiding reliance on an interm ediate generic PPI corpus. 

We trained the model on 96 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with a per -GPU batch size of 4. Optimization 

was performed using AdamW with a learning rate of 1 × 10 -4 for 30,000 training steps. These 

settings were used for the main virus –host training runs reported in this study. 

Baseline methods and evaluation protocol 

We benchmarked ViraHinter against AF2 RF2 -PPI, AF3 and RF2 -Lite using the evaluation 

settings defined in the corresponding benchmark studies. For fair comparison, rather than applying 

a single in -house training split to all external evaluations we retrained ViraHinter on the original 25 

training data provided by each benchmark. For baseline methods, we used the results reported in 

the corresponding original publications whenever those results were available. For methods or 

benchmarks for which published results were not available, we perf ormed inference using publicly 

available model weights. AF3 -based comparisons used the native AF3 confidence score for ranking. 

The main comparison included the standardized RF2 -PPI benchmark under both 1:1000 and 1:10 

positive -to -negative ratios, as well as interface -stratified evaluation across weak (≤10 residues), 

medium (11 to 50 residues) and strong (>50 residues) interaction regimes. 

We additionally evaluated ViraHinter on other human -virus benchmarks with distinct split 

designs, including HVIDB 60 , DeepGNHV/C2Virus 61 and an ViraHinter -specific evaluation set. 

Because the HVIDB split did not fully eliminate viral leakage, we interpreted it as a relatively 

permissive benchmark. We placed greater emphasis on evaluation settings with stricter separation 

criteria, including the DeepGNHV/C2Virus benchmark and our ViraHinter -specific split. We used 

precision –recall analysis and area under the precision –recall curve (AUPR) as the primary 

evaluation metrics because of the strong class imbalance in proteome -scale interaction scr eening .

External coronavirus benchmark and evidence -aware validation 

To assess ranking behavior on an independent coronavirus -focused dataset, we assembled an 

external benchmark derived from previously reported host –coronavirus interaction resources 

spanning SARS -CoV -1, SARS -CoV -2 and MERS -CoV. After standardization, we removed records 

for which the corresponding prot ein sequences could not be retrieved, as well as pairs containing 

sequences that exceeded the model’s length constraints. The final benchmark contained 958 virus –

host protein pairs. To minimize information leakage, any interaction pairs overlapping this 

be nchmark were removed from the training set before evaluation. 

Because the coronavirus benchmark was compiled from interactions that were already 

relatively well supported experimentally, we adopted a stricter training definition for this analysis. 

Specifically, only the high -confidence subset of the curated IntAct da taset was used as positive 

training data. Medium -confidence IntAct interactions were not treated as positive training examples 

in this setting; instead, a subset was incorporated as hard negatives during training. This design 

reduced the risk that moderate ly supported interactions would blur the decision boundary, 26 

encouraged the model to better distinguish highly supported virus –host interactions from weaker or 

more ambiguous associations, and ensured a clearer separation between training and evaluation 

while sharpening the model’s sensitivity to high -evidence inter actions. 

For orthogonal validation, we queried supporting evidence from BioGRID rather than from 

IntAct, which served as the primary source of positive training interactions in this setting. 

Benchmark pairs were then stratified into evidence categories, including n o qualifying support, 

high -throughput support and low -throughput support. This evidence -aware framework enabled us 

to test whether the top -ranked predictions preferentially aligned with independently supported 

coronavirus –host interactions. 

To further explore the interaction landscape of the highest -confidence predictions , we 

examined the top 100 ranked human gene interaction pairs and focused on host proteins that were 

initially linked to only one or two viral species. For these candidates, we used ViraHinter to infer 

interactions with additional viral proteins beyond tho se supported in the benchmark. Based on the 

resulting predictions, we identified human proteins whose inferred viral interaction spectrum 

expanded to include a larger number of viruses and visualized these relationships as virus –host PPI 

networks. This analysis provided a complementary view of potentially shared host factors and 

highlighted candidate proteins that may participate in broader cross -viral interaction programs. 

Multi -stage screening and composite reranking for the influenza proteome -wide analysis 

Because the influenza analysis involved proteome -scale screening against the full human 

protein repertoire, we adopted a multi -stage candidate selection strategy to make large -scale 

evaluation computationally tractable. We first trained a lightweight seque nce -only model on the 

virus –host interaction dataset. This model used the same sequence -module architecture as the 

sequence branch of ViraHinter but excluded the structure module and was used solely for rapid 

prescreening. For each influenza subtype, all c andidate virus –host pairs formed between the viral 

proteins of that sequence and the human protein library were first scored by this sequence -only 

model, and the top 10,000 candidate pairs were retained. This yielded 30,000 prescreened pairs 

across the thr ee influenza subtypes. 27 

These prescreened pairs were then evaluated with the full ViraHinter model to obtain joint 

interaction predictions and corresponding structural outputs. For each subtypes, we selected the top 

100 candidate pairs based on the full -model interaction score. T o prioritize candidates for 

downstream structural and functional validation, we further applied an empirical composite 

reranking score: 

Score = (ViraHinter score × 0.4) + (ipTM × 0.4) + (Sequence score × 0.2). 

This reranking scheme was designed to integrate three complementary signals. The ViraHinter 

score captured the interaction confidence assigned by the full structure -aware model, whereas ipTM 

reflected the internal confidence of the predicted complex struct ure. The sequence score was 

included as an orthogonal signal derived from the lightweight prescreening model. Incorporating 

this term allowed sequence -based support to be retained during final prioritization, which was 

particularly useful in a proteome -sca le setting in which some candidates could be sensitive to 

uncertainty in structure prediction alone. 

Greater weight was assigned to the two structure -aware terms because the final prioritization 

was intended to favor candidates supported both by strong predicted interactions and by more 

reliable complex models. The sequence -based score was therefore inclu ded as a lower -weight 

complementary criterion rather than as a dominant determinant of the final ranking. Accordingly, 

this composite score was used as a practical reranking heuristic for candidate selection and 

downstream analysis, rather than as a separa tely trained or statistically optimized predictive model. 

Statistical analysis 

Model performance was evaluated primarily using precision –recall curves and AUPR. For the 

evidence -aware analyses (Fig. 3) , prediction probabilities were stratified by BioGRID evidence 

class and compared across groups; overall differences in score distributions were assessed using the 

Kruskal -Wallis test. The relationship between prediction scores and independent evidence support 

was further quantified using Spearman rank correlation. To evaluate ranking behavior, we 

performed enrichment analyses on the top -ranked predictions by calculating the proportion of pairs 

from each evidence group within the top 10% of model predictions and normalizing these values by 

the corresponding background frequencies in the full benchmark. We additionally quantified 28 

enrichment across a range of ranking thresholds by computing enrichment -over -background curves 

for supported interaction categories, including any qualifying evidence, low -throughput -supported 

pairs, and pairs supported by both high - and low -throughput evi dence. These analyses were used to 

determine whether independently supported interactions were preferentially concentrated among 

the highest -scoring model predictions. 

We summarized model performance primarily using precision –recall curves and AUPR. For 

evidence -aware analyses, we compared prediction -score distributions across evidence groups and 

assessed the relationship between model scores and supporting evidence coun ts using rank -based 

correlation analysis. We further performed enrichment analyses across top -ranked prediction bins 

and ranking thresholds to determine whether independently supported interactions accumulated 

among the highest -scoring predictions. 

Sequence alignment and identity analysis 

To establish the evolutionary divergence between the influenza A virus (IAV) subtypes 

evaluated in the ViraHinter framework, we performed pairwise sequence comparisons of the 10 

core viral proteins (PB2, PB1, PA, HA, NP, NA, M1, M2, NS1, and NEP) across th e seasonal 

A/Nagasaki/07N020/2008 (H1N1) strain, the seasonal A/China/JN22022/2022 (H3N2) strain and 

an avian -origin A/chicken/Korea/KNUGJ09/2009 (H9N2) strain. The complete set of viral protein 

sequences encoded by H1N1, H3N2, and H9N2, as used for the la rge -scale interactome screening, 

is provided in Extended Data Table 7. Pairwise sequence identity was assessed using the Basic 

Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST). Specifically, BLASTN was employed to evaluate 

nucleotide -level similarity among viral segments for genomic lineage confirmation. The amino acid 

sequence identitie s (Fig. 4a) reflect evolutionary constraints at interaction interfaces, and the 

resulting identity matrix was used to aassociate evolutionary conservation with predicted protein –

protein interaction (PPI) similarity across virus subtypes. 

Software and reproducibility 

We implemented preprocessing, training and downstream analyses using standard Python -

based scientific computing workflows. MSA generation was performed using the same search 

procedure and database setup as AF3. 29 

# Data availability 

The studies referenced in our case analyses are available from previously published 

work 5. Associated datasets are provided in these publications. The amino acid sequences of the 

H3N2 strain used in this study are deposited in the National Microbiology Data Center 

(https://nmdc.cn; accession number: NMDCP0018772 -NMDCP0018783). Data generated and 

processed in this study are publicly available at the following repository: Google Drive folder .

# Code availability 

The code for this study will be made publicly available on GitHub soon .

# References 

60. Yang, X. , et al. HVIDB: a comprehensive database for human -virus protein -protein interactions. 

Brief Bioinform 22 , 832 -844 (2021). 

61. Jiang, L. , et al. Graph neural network integrated with pretrained protein language model for 

predicting human -virus protein -protein interactions. Brief Bioinform 26 (2025). 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was funded by the Prevention and Control of Emerging and Major Infectious Diseases -

National Science and Technology Major Project (2025ZD01903701). 30 

Extended Data Fig. 1 | Perfor mance of ViraHinter on additional virus -host interaction 

benchmarks. 

a, Performance comparison on the HVIDB dataset. ViraHinter achieved the highest area under the 

precision –recall curve (AUPR, 0.884), outperforming the HVIDB baseline, a conventional 

machine -learning model and a CNN -based model. b, Performance comparison on the 

DeepGNHV/C2Virus dataset. Under this stricter benchmark, ViraHinter again achieved the best 

performance (AUPR, 0.600), exceeding DeepGNHV, HBFormer and HVPPI. Together, these 

results show that ViraHinter maintains strong pred ictive performance across ind ependent human –

virus interaction benchmarks with different partitioning schemes and levels of viral leakage control .

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Conserved predicted binding mode of RAB8A with NSP7 from three 

pathogenic coronaviruses. 

Predicted complex structures of human RAB8A with NSP7 from MERS -CoV, SARS -CoV -1 and 

SARS -CoV -2. Human RAB8A is shown in orange and viral NSP7 proteins are shown in green. 

Prediction scores are indicated above each model. Despite sequence divergence among NSP7 

orthol ogues, the three complexes adopt highly similar docking geometries, with the viral proteins 

converging on a common surface region of RAB8A. These structural models support the notion that 

the NSP7 –RAB8A interaction represents a conserved coronavirus –host i nterface and provide a 

mechanistic basis for the shared host dependency identified by ViraHinter .31 

Extended Data Fig. 3 | Sequence divergence, shared host targeting and functional 

organization of the predicted influenza A virus interactome. 

a, Pairwise amino -acid sequence identity of the 10 core viral proteins across the three influenza A 

virus strains used in this study (H1N1, H3N2 and H9N2). Values indicate the sequence identity for 

each viral protein between strain pairs, illustrating substan tial divergence for several proteins, 

particularly HA, M2 and NA. b, Composition of host -gene groups in the top 100 ranked candidates. 

Predicted host factors are partitioned into strain -specific groups, pairwise -shared groups and a three -

strain shared g roup, showing that a large fraction of host genes are targeted by all three strains. c, 

Distribution of the top 100 predicted interactions across individual viral proteins, stratified by host -

gene sharing category. Shared host factors are enriched among multiple viral proteins, whereas 

subtype -specific interactions are more restricted, revea ling both conserved and protein -specific 

targeting patterns. d, Functional categorization of the 33 host factors shared by all three influenza 

strains. These common host targets cluster into five major biological modules, including 

cytoskeleton, vesicular transport, chromatin and DNA damage, RNA metabolism and splicing, and 

signal transduction and cell -cycle regulation, highlighting the core cellular systems recurrently 

targeted across divergent influenza viruses .